---
author: 'jon'
title: 'Autonomy, Mastery, Purpose'
description: ''
category: 'analysis'
layout: '../../layouts/BlogPost.astro'
publishedDate: '2021-05-12'
heroImage: 'autonomy.jpg'
---

What makes a software project a good one to work on? Surely, it's those
where we feel _motivated_. As professionals, we can -- although not
always -- feel some shame to admit a lack of motivation about our
current work. To blame ourselves for a lack of motivation would imply
that motivation comes intrinsically from within, no matter what the
environment is we're working in.

It would be great -- for highly motivated individuals -- if we could
leverage the same amount of motivation in all situations, but it turns
out the human condition is more complicated, and the context we're
working in matters.

Daniel Pink in his book _Drive_, makes the case for _Autonomy, Purpose
and Mastery_, forming the basis of what he calls _Motivation 3.0_. In
this post I'm going to delve into this, coming at it from my perspective
of working in a software consultancy, that is expected to place
individuals that are highly motivated.

# Purpose

I recently saw the Michael Jordan documentary _The Last Dance_ on
Netflix, where you can see the astounding level of motivation that
Michael Jordan and the players around him had, for their final NBA
basketball season together, before the team was to be disbanded.

The Chicago Bulls head coach gave each season a named theme to instill
an underlying sense of purpose that would foster a togetherness and
joint focus. The final season was called _The Last Dance_; an
impassioned plea for getting the team back out on the stage one last
time to deliver together. This message clearly resonated with the team
as they won the NBA finals for a third time in a row.

A sense of purpose is what keeps humans engaged and invested. On
software projects the team's mission will sometimes match the broad
mission statement the company has as a whole. At other times it can be
more discrete and tailored to the situation at hand, like the _The Last
Dance_. It can also be set at the level of the individual joining a
project, i.e. to disentangle the codebase, help with project planning,
to provide mentorship.

For software consultancies working on a client project, the mission
can't be to simply augment staff with more staff, a mission statement
that no one will find compelling. We need to ask, what is the _X_ that
the consultancy is going to help the client achieve? Once the mission is
then set, it needs to be made real, giving the consultants what they
need in order to meet the brief. This could involve having the principal
consultants help set the terms of the engagement before it starts, by
way of running discovery workshops and then to assemble a well matched
team. There can't be a disconnect between those framing the project and
those executing it.

Above all, what is needed to help a team fufill a purpose is _autonomy_.

# Autonomy

The Agile manifesto promotes _People over Process_, with process being
there to support and to help, never to impose. Yet this is so often what
software projects get wrong, where the project management of Scrum or XP
is really manifested as miniaturised Waterfall, reminiscent of the days
of nineteenth century scientific management, squashing the dignity and
humanity out of the individual.

Developers are now increasingly seeking to work for companies with a
_developer led_ culture, where developers are entrusted to lead software
development projects, as [_Chief Programmers_](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chief_programmer_team), as
discussed in the _Mythical Man Month_ book. In this model, proposed by
Harlan Mills, other roles such as project managers, analysts and testers
are there to support developers, with developers given more
responsibility and leadership roles.

This model appeals, where developers are highly valued and selected
accordingly, rather than being seen as an exchangeable commodity.
Software engineers crave the autonomy this gives as it allows them to
exercise creative control and to optimize their path through the work,
bringing efficiencies to a project.

As with anything however, we can take this too far. _Programmer Anarchy_
is about empowering complete freedom and autonomy to all developers. The
downside here is Conway's Law coming back to bite, where the software
architecture starts to resemble a more chaotic and splintered software
development organization, leading to a Cambrian explosion of polyglot
microservices.

Autonomy means entrusting developers with greater responsibility -- but
it doesn't imply a lack of hierarchy. Strong cohesive leadership by the
_chief programmer_ is still required. _Software is not a democracy_.

# Mastery

> A true vocation calls us out beyond ourselves; breaks our heart in the
> process and then humbles, simplifies and enlightens us about the
> hidden, core nature of the work that enticed us in the first place.
>
> -- poet David Whyte

Mastery needs space. As Rich Hickey espouses in his [Hammock Driven Development](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=f84n5oFoZBc) talk, we need
to be able to _step away from the computer_ and dedicate more time to
undisturbed thinking. This allows us to go deeper into our mastery of
the domain and the technical solution space, which will benefit the
project in the way of a simpler design with fewer bugs. This is because
we can spend more time in analysis, reducing our misconceptions and
considering various different approaches, and rooting out the unknown
unknowns.

That said, not every conversation into understanding will yield a
benefit for the project at hand, and this needs to be accepted. A true
vocation is a calling into the unknown and we draw motivation from
descending deeper into it, which transcends any singular assignment.
Over the course of our careers, practice will take us to the levels we
are capable of attaining.

This is true also of software consultancies, where the present-day
clients will be the ancestors of success for future clients. On the face
of it, this is a tough message for the clients, but it cuts both ways:
the clients of today will be richly rewarded by the learnt
experiences - both successes and failures - of previous clients.

# Conclusion

There are projects that suffer from a deep lack of motivation, commonly
known as _bodyshop projects_ or, in polite corporate speak, _staff
augmentation._ These terms convey a message of the intrinsic humanity
being bypassed, where a skilled developer is consigned to being a _+1_
in a spreadsheet, quickly finding themselves performing pre-defined
tasks, without autonomy, without a strong sense of purpose, and without
the opportunity for mastery. It is at this stage that the _Mythical Man
Month_ anti-pattern of adding _more +1s_ to the spreadsheet is reached
for, and more _bodies_ are cycled in.

We can do so much better. We want our projects to be successful, and for
that to happen we need a project with a clear mission and a highly
motivated team. In order to achieve that we must give people the
opportunity to master their skills, the autonomy to make their own
decisions, and a sense of purpose to keep the team and individuals
engaged.
