---
author: 'rro'
title: 'Bridging the Blockchain / Database Divide'
description: 'Do we want a blockchain, a database, or both?'
category: 'db'
layout: '../../layouts/BlogPost.astro'
publishedDate: '2021-07-30'
heroImage: 'bridging-blockchain.jpg'
tags:
  - 'xtdb'
  - 'blockchain'
---

import { Image } from '@astrojs/image/components'
import cordaLedgerVenn from '../../assets/blog/corda-ledger-venn.png'
import cordaVaultSimple from '../../assets/blog/corda-vault-simple.png'
import cruxVsCorda from '../../assets/blog/crux-vs-corda.svg'
import cruxCordaDiag from '../../assets/blog/crux-corda-diag.svg'

## Crux is now XTDB

September 2021 Update: Crux has recently been renamed XTDB.

---

Proponents of the blockchain argue it is a system of record unlike any
other, in which trustless transactions written to a decentralized,
immutable ledger render centralized orchestration obsolete. That is a
mouthful -- but it is also an attractive collection of properties for
certain industries; the centralization of data can lead to malfeasance
and malfeasance leads to broken trust.

However, blockchains often lack other properties we expect from our
datastores: general-purpose storage and powerful query languages, in
particular. A new generation of immutable databases provide some middle
ground but they do not provide decentralized, trustless transactions.

Strong leaders will eschew hype and look to solve the problems their
business faces based on the merits of the technology. But if the
problems of the business demand trustless transactions _and_
sophisticated queries, they may feel like they have nowhere to turn.

Immutable databases are general-purpose immutable ledgers with complete
query languages. Blockchains are distributed ledgers. Any given system
may benefit from queryable immutable ledgers, distributed ledgers, or
both.

# A Blockchain Primer

To qualify as a \"blockchain\" in the sense the term is most often used,
a ledger must exhibit specific behavioral properties across all the
nodes, where a \"node\" is an actor in a distributed system tasked with
maintaining an append-only, synchronized chain of transactions:

1.  **Provenance** (immutable history) - users cannot make changes to
    past transactions

2.  **Decentralization** (distributed consensus) - mutually mistrusting
    parties can participate in a transaction

3.  **Security** (cryptographic trust) - every node verifies how new
    information is added

This is an extremely high-level overview, but in truth, blockchain
systems are the simple combination of algorithms and datastructures
which exhibit these behavioral properties. To go slightly deeper, we
recommend 3Blue1Brown's [_But how does bitcoin actually work?_](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bBC-nXj3Ng4). Although it is
ostensibly a visual bitcoin primer, the only bitcoin-specific concept
discussed is \"Proof of Work\" (one of many possible consensus
mechanisms). The first 18 minutes are broadly applicable and cover the
necessary cryptography in an accessible way. After those 18 minutes, it
should be clear why (and how) a blockchain is decentralized, why you can
trust such a \"trustless\" system, and why cryptographic hash functions
are essential to tie it all together.

Many blockchains also permit the recording and execution of _code_ in
addition to _data_. Known as Smart Contracts, this code can (and often
must) be run by all nodes in the network, guaranteeing the same result
given the same inputs. Smart Contracts are a means of implementing
transaction logic. Results of their execution are then stored in the
blockchain.

## Terminology

It is helpful to qualify common blockchain and database terminology for
our purposes, since these terms are not universally agreed-upon.
_Distributed systems_ will refer to computer processes which must
transact over a network, regardless of the number of nodes.
_Decentralized systems_ will refer to distributed systems in which there
is no local or global central authorities; all nodes are peers.
_Trustless_ will refer to the absence of trust in authorities but
implies other forms of trust (specifically in the correctness of
algorithms) _do exist_, as does trust in the immutable data produced by
those algorithms. _Immutable records_ will refer to the default and
majority state of records, leaving space for legal compliance tools like
eviction. _Temporal systems_ will refer to any data store which tracks a
Transaction Time (wall clock, vector, or otherwise) with each record.
_Bitemporal systems_ will refer to data stores which track a \"Valid
Time\" (sometimes known as \"effectivity\") in addition to the
Transaction Time. Valid Time is usually represented with wall clock
time.

# Blockchain Shortcomings

Smart Contracts, frequently mistaken as a recent development in
blockchain technologies, conceptually date back to Nick Szabo's 1998
paper, [\"Secure Property Titles with Owner Authority\"](https://www.fon.hum.uva.nl/rob/Courses/InformationInSpeech/CDROM/Literature/LOTwinterschool2006/szabo.best.vwh.net/securetitle.html).

Thanks to his background in both law and cryptography, Szabo's original
paper actually covers more ground than common Smart Contract
implementations on the blockchain. Szabo proposed a \"Right to Adverse
Possession\" (formalized squatting) and technical solutions to the
problem of \"Correspondence to Ground\" (reconciling contracts with
reality).

As of this writing, Ethereum is the blockchain network most commonly
associated with Smart Contracts, which makes it a helpful example.
Ethereum Smart Contracts cannot engage the world outside of the
blockchain directly. This makes sense: the fact a Smart Contract must
return the same value wherever and whenever it runs implies that any
dependency on information outside the chain must use a workaround.
Proxies (such as
[Oracles](https://ethereum.org/en/developers/docs/oracles/)) exist to
work around this limitation by polling the dirty outside world of
stateful data and recording it immutably into the Ethereum chain. But
the problem is more fundamental than any technical solution can ever
achieve. If a trustless system wants to speak to the Real World -- a
world full of lies and trickery -- it is forced to trust _something_
other than the computational correctness of an algorithm.

Even more limiting than the boundaries of a trustless system are the
trusted methods of querying that system. Blockchains as they exist today
do not offer comprehensive queries -- much less bitemporal queries.
Since a blockchain's distributed nature makes capturing wall clock time
prohibitively difficult, bitemporal queries are effectively impossible.

# Database Shortcomings

Can we just use an immutable database? Perhaps. But there are reasons
blockchains exist. If all the characteristics outlined in _A Blockchain
Primer_ (Provenance, Decentralization, and Security) are essential to
the behavior of a system, a blockchain is a reasonable solution.

While there is no such thing as a truly \"trustless\" system,
blockchains are perhaps the closest humanity has come thus far. An
immutable database provides _provenance_ insofar as users of the
database trust the people who run it, the network's security, the
hardware it runs on, and the database software itself.

Newer databases such as XTDB (among
[others](https://clojurelog.github.io/)) introduce even more powerful
tools on top of immutable records. In XTDB, it is possible to match data
within Datalog transactions and define transaction functions that attach
behaviors to data, cancelling or even altering transactions in-flight.
Every record in XTDB defines its own temporal validity. This could in
fact be used to represent expiration as described in the \"Adverse
Possession\" section of Szabo's whitepaper, but Valid Time affords the
user much more: time-traveling bitemporal queries across every record in
the system.

While blockchain afficionados will see parallels in XTDB (immutable
records to blocks, transaction functions to Smart Contracts, Valid Time
to contract expiration, etc.) enhanced by a long list of advanced
database features (graph queries, bitemporality, fault-tolerance,
eviction, etc.), the fact remains: XTDB is not a blockchain.

For any given use case, a blockchain may suffice if decentralization is
paramount and querying is unimportant. Alternatively, XTDB will suffice
if central, immutable records with graph query meets all the system's
needs. However, if we want decentralized, immutable records _and_
bitemporal graph queries, we need a new solution.

# The Augmented Blockchain

At JUXT, we imagined a way to combine the best of both worlds:
blockchain's distributed and trustless nature combined with the power of
Datalog's bitemporal graph queries.

## Corda: Blockchain distributed apps

[Corda](https://www.corda.net/) is an open source distributed
applications system built on the blockchain. Unlike cryptocurrencies,
the Corda blockchain targets existing business processes and is private
by default. At the heart of Corda is a network of services called
[notaries](https://docs.corda.net/docs/corda-os/4.7/key-concepts-notaries.html) -- which
provide _uniqueness consensus_, _timestamping_, and *transaction
validation* -- in addition to regular blockchain nodes running custom,
distributed application code on the ledger. Data shared between these
nodes consists of immutable entities subject to state transitions,
recorded in their own chain of states.

Corda offers a framework for developers to write logic with a
combination of
[Contracts](https://docs.corda.net/docs/corda-os/4.7/key-concepts-contracts.html)
and
[Flows](https://docs.corda.net/docs/corda-os/4.7/key-concepts-flows.html).
Contracts in Corda are comparable to Smart Contracts in Ethereum, right
down to the use of Oracles for accessing the outside world. Flows,
however, are permitted access to the outside world. Flows describe the
interaction between nodes in order to validate one or more entities\'
state transitions. Crucially, not all nodes in the network must
participate in such transactions -- only the ones identified within the
context of a transaction's inputs. This implies not all nodes need to
know about all the facts in the Corda network.

<Image alt='image' src={cordaLedgerVenn} />

Consensus in Corda is dictated by notaries (for uniqueness) and Public
Key Infrastructure (for identity). Nodes register with an identity
service when entering the network and can either initiate or be
triggered to participate in a transaction. All of the nodes
participating in a transaction -- including a notary -- check and sign
the transaction before it is committed to an individual node's internal
storage, which Corda refers to as a _Vault_.

Vaults contain _States_ and _Transactions_. A State is an object
representation of a current or historical fact. A Transaction references
input and output States, as well as one (or several) Contracts used to
approve its execution:

<Image alt='image' src={cordaVaultSimple} />

Corda is not a database, nor does it pretend to be. It extends the
general definition of \"blockchain\" to include dissociated nodes,
private data, and powerful distributed applications. But it remains
difficult to use Corda alone for advanced queries:

- Vaults provide a very simple query interface over States, with some
  handy logical operators. But these queries are only capable of
  rudimentary filtering.

- States are dependent on a Schema. Unlike schema-less documents in
  XTDB, we can't add new attributes to new versions of a fact over its
  lifetime.

- Corda does not have temporal querying capabilities.

While Corda does perceive the difference between a consumed and
non-consumed State (present and past versions of a fact), we cannot
rewind the ledger to a particular point in time to contextualize
queries:

Queries in XTDB can place the observer at any arbitrary point in time.
Corda's time model is quite different, capturing a fact's linear
evolution rather than its validity.

<img src={cruxVsCorda} />

The following examples assume we have data about movies and people (cast
members, directors, etc.), each modeled and inserted separately. We are
trying to find the title of all movies where Sylvester Stallone was part
of the cast.

Here is a query with data modeled in Corda States:

**Corda example query in Kotlin**

```kotlin
/* ... For brevity, schemas for Person and Movie are elided. ... */

val stalloneExpression = builder { PersonSchemaV1.PersistentPersonState::name.equal("Sylvester Stallone") }
val stalloneCriteria = VaultCustomQueryCriteria(stalloneExpression)
val stalloneResults = vaultService.queryBy<Person.State>(stalloneCriteria)
assertThat(stalloneResults.states).hasSize(1)
val stalloneId = stalloneResults[0].getState().getData().linearId

val movies = vaultService.queryBy<Movie.State>() //
val result = movies.filter { movie ->
    movie.getState().getData().cast.contains(stalloneId)
}.forEach { movie ->
    movie.getState().getData().title
}
assertThat(result).containsAll(listOf("First Blood", "Rambo III", "Rambo: First Blood Part II"))
```

- Vault queries cannot build criteria with filters based on a list's
  contents (see: [Vault API: QueryCriteria interface](https://docs.corda.net/docs/corda-os/4.8/api-vault-query.html#querycriteria-interface)).
  Instead, we must pull all the movies and do the filtering ourselves.

Here is the same query in XTDB:

**XTDB example query in Datalog**

```clojure
(q '{:find [title]
     :where [[p :person/name "Sylvester Stallone"]
             [m :movie/cast p]
             [m :movie/title title]]})
;; #{["First Blood"], ["Rambo III"], ["Rambo: First Blood Part II"]}
```

## XTDB + Corda: Bridging the Divide

Corda is primarily written in (and for) Java and Kotlin, which makes it
very easy to integrate with XTDB. We can run XTDB alongside Corda nodes,
and call upon XTDB functionality within the context of a transaction
Flow.

The [`xtdb-corda`](https://xtdb.com/reference/corda.html) library
enables Corda State data to be piped into XTDB. By querying XTDB instead
of the Corda node we can express temporal queries over historical and
current States.

<img src={cruxCordaDiag} />

The simplest way to use the library is by specifying a mapping from
Corda States to XTDB documents, which can be done automatically by
implementing the `XtdbState` interface on our Corda State classes, as
shown below. Users who want even more flexibility over their mapping can
use
[`withDocumentMapping`](https://github.com/xtdb/xtdb/blob/master/docs/storage/modules/ROOT/pages/corda.adoc#mapping-corda-documents-into-xtdb)
for full control over what is written to the XTDB transaction log.

With the `XtdbState` approach, we describe a Corda schema inside State
classes as if we were modeling our data in a pure Corda application.
Additionally, we encode the same data as a map of `String -> Any`. XTDB
can consume and reason over this map contained in the `xtdbDoc` value,
while keeping track of evolving versions of the State thanks to
`xtdbId`:

**XtdbState Interface**

```kotlin
package xtdb.corda.state

interface XtdbState {
    val xtdbId: Any
    val xtdbDoc: Map<String, Any>
}
```

**Example implementation of XtdbState**

```kotlin
data class IOUState(val value: Int,
                    val lender: Party,
                    val borrower: Party,
                    override val linearId: UniqueIdentifier = UniqueIdentifier()) :
    LinearState, QueryableState, XtdbState {

    override val xtdbId = linearId.id

    override val xtdbDoc: Map<String, Any> = mapOf(
        "iou-state/value" to value,
        "iou-state/lender" to lender.name.toString(),
        "iou-state/borrower" to borrower.name.toString())
}
```

The `xtdb-corda` library extends the XTDB node with a custom transaction
log that subscribes to validated States derived from transactions. This
allows the user to write a custom `@CordaService` to define how States
are recorded in XTDB. Here is the simplest implementation:

```kotlin
@CordaService
class XtdbService(private val serviceHub: AppServiceHub) : SingletonSerializeAsToken() {
    val xtdb = serviceHub.startXtdbNode {
        withCordaTxLog {
            withDocumentMapping {
                if (it is XtdbState) listOf(it)
                else null
            }
        }
    }
}
```

Finally, we can issue queries simply by calling the `query` method on
the `xtdb` instance:

```kotlin
val xtdb = cordaNode.services.cordaService(XtdbService::class.java).node

assertEquals(
    listOf(cordaNode.info.singleIdentity().name.toString(), 1L),
    xtdb.db().query("""
        {:find [?l ?v]
         :where [[?iou :iou-state/lender ?l]
                 [?iou :iou-state/borrower ?b]
                 [?iou :iou-state/value ?v]]}""".trimIndent())
        .first())
```

As one would expect, the flow of transactions from Corda to XTDB is a
one-way street. XTDB must contain a perfect immutable record of the
immutable records in Corda, so the library explicitly disallows
submitting transactions directly to XTDB:

```clojure
(defrecord CordaTxLog [dialect ^AppServiceHub service-hub, document-mapper]
  db/TxLog
  ;; . . .
  (submit-tx [this tx-events]
    (throw (UnsupportedOperationException.
            "CordaTxLog does not support submit-tx - submit transactions directly to Corda"))))
```

Using this approach, we are now able to automatically replicate the
vault contents of any Corda node into XTDB. We can use XTDB Datalog
queries to drive transaction logic accross multiple State types and
harness the power of Valid Time temporal queries.

# Conclusion

Your constraints dictate which tools appropriately solve your company's
unique problems. Blockchains solve very real trust, validation, and
distributed storage problems. Immutable databases solve audit,
compliance, safety, and query problems.

Corda is a powerful, business-first blockchain. XTDB is the world's only
open source, immutable, bitemporal graph database. Collectively, they
create an open source solution for a new generation of businesses that
require all these behavioral characteristics.

Of course, Corda isn't the only blockchain. If your company is working
with other blockchains capable of Byzantine Fault Tolerance or Smart
Contracts, such as [Tendermint](https://tendermint.com/) or
[Ethereum](https://ethereum.org), we would love to hear about what
you're building: [XTDB+Blockchain,I am building...](mailto:hello@xtdb.com)

[Empress Elisabeth Chain Bridge in 1910, connected Tetschen (now Děčín) to the major railroad from Dresden to Prague.](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Empress_Elisabeth_Bridge_in_1910.jpg) -
Brück & Sohn, CC0 1.0 Public Domain.
