---
author: 'mal'
title: 'ClojuTRE Report - 2016'
description: 'Personal reflections on a great Clojure conference'
category: 'clojure'
layout: '../../layouts/BlogPost.astro'
publishedDate: '2016-09-14'
heroImage: 'clojutre-thoughts.jpg'
---

import { Image } from '@astrojs/image/components'

JUXT were proud sponsors of ClojuTRE again this year, and I was very
happy to make the trip over to Finland last week to attend. And what an
impressive event it was! I must say it ranks as one of the best Clojure
conferences I've ever attended.

The talks were fun, inspiring, educational and entertaining, while the
organizers did a great job of making everything work behind the scenes
so the talks could take centre-stage.

The 20 minute per talk, single track format made for lively
conversations in the breaks and at the after party - a format we've
decided to adopt for our upcoming XT16 conference.

This is a quick write up of some of my personal highlights before my
memory starts fading, a process accelerated by the alcohol consumed on
both evenings.

import ba from '../../assets/blog/behind-aki.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={ba} />

Such was the diversity of talks that I was left with the impression that
Clojure is a language becoming ever-more versatile, rapidly improving
and strengthening its advantages in its core niches.

After a welcome from MC Tommi and the Mayor of Tampere, Robert Johansson
keynoted the conference with a talk on computerised psychology. I was
heavily distracted with last minute preparations on my own talk which
followed (if you've ever spoken at a conference, you'll know the
feeling!)

After me was Yehonathan Sharvit, who introduced
[Klipse](http://blog.klipse.tech/clojure/2016/03/17/klipse.html), a
ClojureScript REPL in the browser. I hadn't realized until now that this
project (and others I expect) have only become possible now that the
ClojureScript compiler has been ported to ClojureScript. I wasn't the
only speaker to realize that now it's possible to embed ClojureScript
straight into HTML5 slide decks. Watch out for fancy animations and
other cool stuff coming to a Clojure talk near you!

It was great to meet Simon Belak in the speakers\' sauna the night
before and he spoke authoritatively about his role as a data scientist.
Data science was an early niche for Clojure, and Simon brought a
refreshingly modern perspective on it. I liked his emphasis on reducing
latency, going for rapid feedback to work with data in a tactile way. It
certainly chimed with my own views on how we should be working with
data.

import si from '../../assets/blog/simon.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={si} />

Markus Hjort gave an intriguing talk on harnessing Amazon's
(server-less) Lambda technology to run a distributed fold, using a
standard example of finding similar words (using the Levenstein
distance). The results were interesting, he was able to get a good
scale-out performance improvement from the tech. (up to a limit) and
even revealed his Amazon bill at the end (spoiler: it's not expensive!)

One of my favorite talks of the conference was from Aki Helin. Aki's
talk was a wonderful blend of history, ideas, jokes, memes, cultural
references (Monty Python, check!) and a few _wow_ moments.

Nikita Prokopov is mostly famous for his DataScript database and his
talk was on his [Rum](https://github.com/tonsky/rum) React-based
ClojureScript library. Every time I get a swig of Nikita's Rum it tastes
good: a modular set of _mixins_ for re-use (even for drag-and-drop),
built-in support for server-side rendering. All in all, it's a very
accomplished library.

Arne Brasseur gave an intro to
[clojure.spec](http://clojure.org/about/spec). Personally, I haven't yet
invested the time to learn spec so I was very happy to receive this free
training as a member of the audience. Victor Eriksson gave a polished
talk on React Native, full of the kind of wisdom you'd get only from a
working practitioner.

Jarppe Länsiö was given the job of the warm-up act for David Nolen's
closing keynote and delivered 100%. His talk was warm, funny and
entertaining. But I took away a timely reminder of the JVM's amazing
track-record in the world of what we now call IoT. Why are we struggling
to write C programs on micro-controllers when we can be using Clojure!

import ja from '../../assets/blog/jarppe.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={ja} />

David Nolen's keynote contained a look-back on the last 5 years of
ClojureScript while looking forward to what we might expect in the
future. What really came across was David's humility, accomplished
leadership qualities and how he has encouraged the contributions of over
a hundred individual contributors to the project. David explained that
he felt that ClojureScript had reached a level where it was
indistinguishable from magic, even for him, aware as he is of how all
the tricks work.

All in all, I think ClojuTRE 2016 will be remembered as a classic and
sets a high bar for our own XT16 conference next month, but we're
working very hard on the final preparations and it's looking great. So
if you missed out on ClojuTRE this year, or you're already feeling
withdrawal symptoms, we still have a [few tickets
left!](https://juxt.pro/XT16.html). If you were at the ClojuTRE
conference this year please use the coupon code CLOJUTRE for a special
discount.
