---
author: 'jon'
title: 'The Clojure Job Market'
description: 'Thoughts on the European Clojure Job Market'
category: 'analysis'
layout: '../../layouts/BlogPost.astro'
publishedDate: '2017-06-29'
heroImage: 'job-market.jpg'
---

At JUXT we predominantly write software for our clients using Clojure.
We go to a number of Clojure conferences and recently we published a
[series of reference case-studies](https://juxt.pro/clojure-in.html)
where we've talked to various companies about their Clojure adoption.

For companies curious about Clojure, one of the first questions we are
asked is _\"Will we be able to hire?\"_. This is one of the reasons we
started writing our case-studies: we wanted to have a credible,
well-researched answer on hand.

# Good news for employers.

In our experience, there are substantially more developers out there
wanting to work with Clojure than there are Clojure developer roles
available.

At the various conferences we've attended - EuroClojure in particular -
there is a common story amongst the delegates; developers who aren't
using Clojure within their place of employment yet, but who are keen to
embrace the technology. These developers range from freelancers looking
for remote work, to developers who enjoy working at their current
company, but who are craving an innovative technological shift.

We find that when companies advertise via the correct channels, Clojure
developers can readily be found. Put bluntly, if a company is having an
issue hiring Clojure developers, it may not be because of Clojure
itself.

# The balance

Employers are the first to recognize that there is no silver bullet when
it comes to hiring, but that even so, Clojure is seen as a win by the
majority of them.

For example, a quote from [Funding
Circle](https://juxt.pro/blog/posts/clojure-in-fundingcircle.html) sums
it up: _\"Finding good developers is always hard but at least with
Clojure it's a draw in its own right. People often learn it in their own
time and they really want to do it.\"_

Or from [USwitch](https://juxt.pro/blog/posts/clojure-in-uswitch.html):
_\"We find that the quality of people coming through the door for
interview is generally higher\"._

And from [Metail](https://juxt.pro/blog/posts/clojure-in-metail.html):
_\"With Clojure there are pros and cons; it's not massively taught in
universities, but then there are people actively looking around wanting
to do Clojure. We've had people approach us for jobs\"_.

It certainly is a pros and cons debate. A company adopting Clojure - or
any non-mainstream yet modern and well-regarded technology - is putting
a flag down stating that the choice of technology matters to them. On
the back of this they will typically attract developers searching for an
endorsement of the tools that they use, to know that ultimately the
quality of software they build matters.

If companies take the next step of supporting the tech community by
sponsoring conferences and meet-ups, then they will generally profit
through the calibre of their inbound hires.

The nuance - as I have personally experienced - is that you need
developers who are also similarly motivated to deliver working software
for the business. You need developers who are both [smart and get things
done](https://www.amazon.co.uk/Smart-Gets-Things-Done-Technical/dp/1590598385).
Technologies built fastidiously on sound engineering principles will
attract a range of developers; the challenge is to filter through the
candidates who possess a healthy balance of perspective when it comes to
delivery.

# Upskilling

Employers will often find a large appetite in developers wanting to
learn Clojure. This can be the case with existing employees or with new
joiners.

[Signal Media](https://juxt.pro/blog/posts/clojure-in-signal.html)
demonstrate this point by training their data scientists in Clojure:
_\"We believe every data scientist is a developer - every one of our
researchers will pass a 4Clojure test (for example do 20 exercises in
four days). Everyone from the research side has enjoyed learning a new
language, Clojure is easy to learn.\"_

There is certainly a theme of employers upskilling their existing
developers towards using Clojure, rather than hiring seasoned Clojure
developers from the get-go. As in our interview with
[Telenor](https://juxt.pro/blog/posts/clojure-in-telenor.html):_\"We
look for good developers, not necessarily Clojure developers. We look
for people with experience of functional programming and an interest in
learning languages.\"_

And in our interview with
[Zalando](https://juxt.pro/blog/posts/clojure-in-zalando.html); _\"I had
a developer join our team who was new to Clojure. After three months he
wrote a proxy server that wrapped a legacy server and was highly
performant. Three months was enough for him to deliver production
code.\"_

Our conclusion is that experienced employers who have crossed the
Clojure chasm tend to focus on finding bright developers with aptitude
above all else. So long as a company has a core of Clojure coding
excellence, they don't necessarily need to go and hire explicitly for
experienced Clojure developers.

There is also another factor in play: Clojure teams tend to be
_smaller_. We see this as a constant feature of the industry where
Clojure is concerned: small teams often flying underneath the radar.
There are exceptions to the rule, but the observable pattern is that
it's rare for Clojure teams to grow to be considered _large_.

# What of the employees?

I speak to a good number of developers who are searching for the best
roles. Often they come with a checklist comprising certain attributes
such as remote and part-time working, single-page tech stacks and
immutable architectures.

Such developers will often recognize the supply versus demand balance of
market forces in play. For example, there are fewer companies using
innovative and attractive technologies than there are using conservative
mainstream ones. The more attractive the role, the more applicants, and
it will be the developers who are open minded who will get the best
roles.

Employers usually prefer permanent, full-time employees who are willing
invest in their culture and long-term objectives. There are freelancers
who are sought after for their skillset and competence - who have built
a brand and reputation around themselves - and there are those selected
for their availability and flexible status.

At JUXT we make use of highly-successful freelance developers with a
proven track record; they often work on projects alongside our permanent
employees. I have a high regard for top-tier freelancers, yet I caution
developers who are considering this career path to look at the market
from both sides; I'd advise them to remain flexible and not to put
themselves in a position of reliance on finding immediate contracts.

It's interesting that the IT job market can differ so much depending on
the technologies used, but it doesn't surprise when you stop to consider
it. Developers working on technologies such as Mainframes, COBOL etc are
in an extremely good bargaining position. Java is going the same way -
albeit more slowly - with developers increasingly wanting to move on to
more modern languages such as Kotlin, Scala, and Clojure, or to jump
ship from the JVM entirely.

# Conclusion

Employers who are offering attractive roles using Clojure will find they
get a number of applicants, which is great news for all; more companies
using Clojure and more developers applying for Clojure roles, is a
healthy sign of things to come.

But it's also great news for those taking the jobs on offer, because
those jobs are so highly prized and so well regarded. We have heard
recently that Clojure programmers are [amongst the highest paid in the
industry](http://www.techrepublic.com/article/what-are-the-highest-paid-jobs-in-programming-the-top-earning-languages-in-2017/).
Perhaps because Clojure teams are smaller with the developers inside of
them becoming more highly valued, then it's a win/win for all concerned.
