---
author: 'jon'
title: 'ClojuTre Report'
description: 'Attending the ClojuTre conference'
category: 'clojure'
layout: '../../layouts/BlogPost.astro'
publishedDate: '2015-09-18'
heroImage: 'clojutre-report.jpg'
---

import { Image } from '@astrojs/image/components'

This was my first time at [ClojuTre](http://clojutre.org/2015/), a
Clojure conference in Finland organized by
[Metosin](http://www.metosin.fi). This conference is entirely free for
attendees, and so immediately there's a feel good factor and positive
vibe about it. Free maybe, but the event was still well polished and
executed, so full credit to Metosin.

import sp from '../../assets/blog/sponsors.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={sp} />

[JUXT](https://juxt.pro) sponsored the conference alongside other
companies, and Malcolm Sparks from JUXT also gave a talk on
[yada](https://github.com/juxt/yada). This meant myself and Malcolm
traveled up to Finland beforehand where we got to experience beer
drinking and Clojure discussions while sitting unclothed in a hot sauna
room with other speakers and sponsors. Post-sauna we enjoyed a fantastic
speakers\' dinner and the drinks continued to flow freely, gin in
particular. Later on Sam Aaron got some tunes going.

import la from '../../assets/blog/lakes.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={la} />

[Tampere](http://www.tampere.fi/english/tampereinfo.html) in Finland is
a beautiful place, and flying in over the forests and lakes one can
imagine holidaying here, doing some fishing, kicking back, perhaps
engaging in a coding retreat. We were treated to some excellent weather
and so it was a gorgeous few days, idyllic.

[You can see all the talks
here](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLetHPRQvX4a_tA9hGP935-OyLOYaRKpnj).
The talks were 20 minutes in length, which I thought worked well. It's
rare that people manage to hold their attention span for much longer,
and it can quickly become grueling to sit through a sequence of 45+ min
talks. Also, Metosin started the day in the afternoon, which
complemented my post-gin-recovery temperament well.

import mi from '../../assets/blog/micha.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={mi} />

To get started, [Micha Niskin gave us an overview of
Hoplon](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UoZyyo2Bwr8&list=PLetHPRQvX4a_tA9hGP935-OyLOYaRKpnj&index=1)
that uses Javelin as opposed to the virtual DOM. There's lots going on
here with using composable _cells_ as opposed to global atoms, and a
literal HTML syntax. Hoplin seems fairly radical (not just another React
implementation), and so is definitely worth checking out.

import re from '../../assets/blog/renzo.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={re} />

[Renzo
Borgatti](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QI9Fc5TT87A&index=2&list=PLetHPRQvX4a_tA9hGP935-OyLOYaRKpnj)
gave an entertaining and useful talk on pearls of the Clojure core API.
These are functions you probably don't know about that are potentially
useful (i.e. `destructure` and `clojure.reflect/reflect`). Good old
`fnil` was in there also, a function that I know about and should use
more.

[Sebastian Bensusan talked us through a comparison of the various of
forms of polymorphism found in Clojure code-bases in the
large](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wjHTsaqwMIE&list=PLetHPRQvX4a_tA9hGP935-OyLOYaRKpnj&index=3),
and observations on striking the right balance between getting things
done and keeping things tidy. He ended the talk with a nice demo of a
graphical interface he's developed for viewing namespace graphs.

[Jonas Enlund gave a
talk](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hGWovJGbKJk&list=PLetHPRQvX4a_tA9hGP935-OyLOYaRKpnj&index=4)
on alternative data structures, in particular
[`core.rrb-vector`](https://github.com/clojure/core.rrb-vector) giving
us _logarithmic time concatenation and slicing_ and
[`data.avl`](https://github.com/clojure/data.avl) for sorted sets and
maps giving `rank` operations and logarithmic performance for certain
operations. It's good to learn about these data structures when you need
help with performance.

import jo from '../../assets/blog/joseph.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={jo} />

[Joseph Wilk gave us a stunning
demonstration](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_S5FZ2CcLlc&list=PLetHPRQvX4a_tA9hGP935-OyLOYaRKpnj&index=5)
of Clojure produced music and visuals, using Overtone and OpenGL
Shaders. This was a welcome interlude to the technical talks, giving us
a chance to reflect on the beauty of life, to have our minds temporarily
lifted.

import mt from '../../assets/blog/martin.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={mt} />

[Martin Klepsch's talk](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tBnu2JmK4p0) on
\"Desktop Apps with ClojureScript\" was useful if you need to build a
desktop app (to get the dock icon), and you also want to maintain
writing the front-end in Clojurescript and React etc. He builds
Clojurescript apps using [Electron](http://electron.atom.io).

[Markus Hjort gave an experience
report](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1ZOj6R9vOi0&list=PLetHPRQvX4a_tA9hGP935-OyLOYaRKpnj&index=8)
of the differences between writing microservices in Javascript, Scala
and Clojure. Needless to say Clojure wins, and he had some amusing
remarks such as \"You can tell when a colleague is working on a Scala
service, because you can hear the CPU fan\".

import ms from '../../assets/blog/malcolm-screen.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={ms} />

[Malcolm gave an _intro to yada_
talk](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tKFrqsFC1XM&index=9&list=PLetHPRQvX4a_tA9hGP935-OyLOYaRKpnj).
[yada](https://github.com/juxt/yada) is a framework where we can specify
our web resources in data, providing a simple way of serving resources
using yada that totally nails the HTTP spec, gives you lots of async
goodness, out-the-box Swagger support which is all the rage.

[Tommi Reiman of Metosin talked
about](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BIjVH4SAmiM&list=PLetHPRQvX4a_tA9hGP935-OyLOYaRKpnj&index=10)
a library he's building called _Kekkonen_ that helps to compose
_commands and queries_ in your Clojure web application. I've felt the
pain I believe Kekkonen will hopefully alleviate; i.e. you want to build
APIs you can call from ClojureScript, but it can be over the top to
build RESTful APIs for each command and query. That's a lot of
boilerplate REST code, and lots of potential debates about constructing
the perfect RESTful endpoint, when it's only internally consumed anyway.
Kekkonen will provide a lightweight _registry_ where you plug your
commands and queries into, and all the web routing plumbing is done for
you. It will also help you with security and HTTP options around the
commands and queries, using meta-data on the command/query API
functions. Interesting stuff.

import co from '../../assets/blog/coffee.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={co} />

[Ari-Pekka
Viitanen](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rgtkDpcXjXU&index=7&list=PLetHPRQvX4a_tA9hGP935-OyLOYaRKpnj)
talked about building multi-tenant SaaS application, and how he
approached data segregation between clients. He illustrated their use of
dynamic scope, developing a `with-tenant` macro to switch between tenant
contexts, while added a cautionary note of the dangers of dynamic scope
in general.

[Luke VanderHart gave an inspiring talk on _Simplicity in
Practice_](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2YmmfS5YTQ0&index=11&list=PLetHPRQvX4a_tA9hGP935-OyLOYaRKpnj).
Luke is an engaging speaker, encouraging us to think about _wieldly_
systems, bringing together the concepts of simplicity and ease, which
are not mutually exclusive. This is basically a talk exploring how we
can be better programmers.

import rob from '../../assets/blog/robert.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={rob} />

[\"Wherefore art thou LFE?\" by Robert
Virding](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BvCBTpnlqs8&index=12&list=PLetHPRQvX4a_tA9hGP935-OyLOYaRKpnj)
was the last talk, basically a Lisp on the Erlang VM. If you're on that
particular VM and you want a Lisp then check it out.

All in all an enjoyable and relaxed conference. Sam Aaron and Joseph
Wilks once again provided some tunes at the conference after party,
where there was a mass of pizza and black sausage, and the beer also
flowed.

import dr from '../../assets/blog/drinks.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={dr} />
