---
author: 'and'
title: 'ClojuTRE 2019'
description: 'An amazing conference with amazing speakers'
category: 'clojure'

publishedDate: '30 Sep 2019'
heroImage: 'clojutre.jpg'
---

As [ClojuTRE 2019](https://clojutre.org/2019) comes to a close, I am
left with many different feelings - from joy and excitement to
inspiration and massive appreciation. I think everyone that attended
would agree with me when I say that this is one of the best conferences.
I'd like to say a massive thank you to
[Metosin](https://www.metosin.fi/en/), the numerous other sponsors and
to all the amazing speakers for putting the time and effort into making
this conference such a success.

There were too many great talks to mention them all so I would like to
highlight a few that I personally enjoyed a lot. Be sure to check out
all the videos though when they are released over the coming week or
two. There were also a lot of tweets so check out
[\@clojuTRE](https://twitter.com/clojuTRE) and the
[#clojutre2019](https://twitter.com/search?q=%23clojutre2019) hashtag.

**_ note
Edit: [The videos from ClojuTRE 2019 are up on YouTube
now](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLetHPRQvX4a-c3KDRTxxwGRmEMutL8Apf)_**

# Day 1

The first day started off with the FP track. Fabrizio Ferrai
([\@fabferrai](https://twitter.com/fabferrai)) kicked things off with a
talk on building and maintaining a package manager. His talk was a
graceful blend of humour and insightful / painful lessons learned along
the way. If you have some free time and you're looking for a talk that
will make you laugh and hopefully learn something about package
management and why not to roll your own, then this is a great session to
watch.

[Nir Rubinstein](https://twitter.com/nirrubinstein) from AppsFlyer
chatted about the philosophy of language. I've always enjoy philosophy
and studied language and literature so this talk resonated a lot with
me. A large focal point of Nir's talk were the seven principles outlined
in **Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus**, a book by [Ludwig
Wittgenstein](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ludwig_Wittgenstein). If you
like philosophy or the study of language or mathematics then you will
enjoy this talk.

[Daniel Slutsky](https://twitter.com/daslu_) has been working with the
various maintainers of data science related Clojure libraries (go
checkout [scicloj](https://github.com/scicloj)). I've been silently
following along over the past year as they have worked to bring Clojure
and R closer together to improve the data science story for Clojure.
Daniel spoke about some of these efforts and showed a few examples of
calling R from Clojure and vice versa. If you're into data science, then
definitely watch this talk when the videos are out.

Next up was an amazing talk on Computer Mathematics, AI and Functional
Programming by [Moa Johansson](https://twitter.com/BaraMoa). Moa knows
an incredible amount about the history in this domain, from the 1950's
through to the present day. She did a great job of highlighting the
excitement and anticipation of the great minds of the 1960's and how
many of their predictions about computer programmes have come to pass
(even though slightly later than originally anticipated). The talk
included a demo of a programme discovering/solving mathematical proofs.
A delightful talk worth watching.

[Richard Feldman](https://twitter.com/rtfeldman) gave an entertaining
talk entitled \"Why Isn't Functional Programming the Norm?\" which
centred around the evolution of mainstream programming languages which
happen to be OO, but the reasons that he deduces for this are not quite
what you'd expect. A fun and educational talk that goes into great depth
about the history of programming languages.

[Fotis Papadogeorgopoulos](https://twitter.com/isfotis) gave a talk on
keeping websites accessible. This is definitely an area where many
developers could put in that little bit of extra attention that would
result in a better world for people that rely on assistive technologies
such as screen readers. If you'd like to make their lives a little
better, this talk is a great place to start and has many links to
resources that can help.

[Andrea Leopardi](https://twitter.com/whatyouhide) is one of the core
maintainers of [Elixir](https://elixir-lang.org/) and gave a light
hearted tour of the language and it's features and about how decisions
are made around the maintenance of the language and its evolution over
time.

The after-parties were great fun and we were lucky enough to go to the
speakers after-party at [Nitor](https://www.nitor.com/en)\'s offices.
They were great hosts. Thank you all very much for having us there.

# Day 2

Day 2 started with a [Crux](https://juxt.pro/crux) tutorial session
where [Johanna Antonelli](https://twitter.com/JohannaAntone10) helped
attendees find and get started with the [Crux
tutorials](https://juxt.pro/crux/tutorial), in particular the space
adventure tutorial, [A Tale of Time and
Space](https://juxt.pro/blog/posts/crux-tutorial-setup.html). It was
good to see so many people attend the session and we hope that they
enjoy working through the series and become more familiar with using
Crux.

[Michiel Borkent](https://twitter.com/borkdude) showed the off some of
the cool features of [clj-kondo](https://github.com/borkdude/clj-kondo),
\"a linter that sparks joy\". If you've ever watched Marie Kondo, you'll
understand where the inspiration for the project name comes from. [You
can see Michiel's talk slides of the presentation
here](https://speakerdeck.com/borkdude/clj-kondo-a-linter-for-clojure-code-that-sparks-joy-at-clojutre-2019)
and I would highly recommend trying clj-kondo out and watching the video
of his talk once it's published online.

[Tommi Reiman](https://twitter.com/ikitommi), the co-founder of Metosin,
gave an interesting talk on strategies for analysing the performance of
Clojure code using tools like flame graphs and shared some handy tips on
ways to significantly improve the speed of your code. I highly recommend
watching the video when it comes out. Metosin were also handing out some
cool stickers, including the snow people captured in the image below.
[You can see the slides from Tommi's talk
here](https://www.slideshare.net/metosin/naked-performance-with-clojure).

[Jack Rusher](https://twitter.com/jackrusher) was inspiring the creative
side of the audience with his various designs and ideas about the
creative mind. The presentation was a good mix of light hearted humour
and funky visuals. I was so captivated that I forgot to capture any
video of his generated animations (which were pretty awesome).

[Dave Snowden](https://twitter.com/snowded)\'s talk on dealing with
unanticipated need was probably the highlight of the conference for me.
The content of the talk was very thought provoking. I couldn't do it
justice trying to summarise it. If you watch only one video from
ClojuTRE 2019, this should definitely be it.

[Håkan Råberg](https://github.com/hraberg) is a still mind that is
lightning sharp and full of knowledge. He spoke about the internals and
design decisions around [Crux](https://juxt.pro/crux/index.html) and
clearly had a solid understanding about it as he spoke at great speed to
cover the breadth of information he was trying to share with the
audience. Being a JUXT employee, I am obviously a bit biased towards
this talk, but I think it's fair to say that this is a talk worth
watching. You can read [the slides from Håkan's talk
here](https://juxt-resources.netlify.app/pdf/hakan-raberg-the-design-and-implementation-of-a-bitemporal-dbms.pdf).

Finishing off the conference was [Alex
Miller](https://twitter.com/puredanger) from
[Cognitect](https://www.cognitect.com/). It was a delight to finally
watch one of the Cognitect team give a talk in person. Alex started off
talking about his path as a programmer, from childhood through to his
interview process with Cognitect. Another light hearted talk with some
good insights that were funny (because they were true). He also chatted
about some of the processes that he and Rich Hickey use to plan and
communicate with each other and about spec and some of the nice features
coming to version 2. Another talk that is well worth the watch.

Once again, the after-party at [Gofore](https://gofore.com/en/home/)\'s
office was great fun. I'm sure everyone that attended would like to say
thank you.

# Extras

The main hall was filled with sponsor stands that included interesting
games (like air ping pong) and various competitions to enter. Some
examples include Solita, who had a code challenge where attendees could
find three digit codes on their website, as well as code cracking
challenges to find codes and win various prizes, and JUXT, who had a
mystery word challenge to win flights, accommodation and a ticket to
next year's [XT20 conference](https://xt20.tech/) in London.

You may also be wondering who the nun is on the stage screen photo. She
is [Mary Kenneth
Keller](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mary_Kenneth_Keller), one of the
first two people to earn a doctorate in computer science in the United
States.

# A massive thank you

This has been an amazing two days and I have met so many great people,
reconnected with old friends and made new ones. I hope that I have the
privilege of coming to ClojuTRE 2020 and beyond. Thank you again to
Metosin and all the sponsors and speakers for making this such a
memorable experience. I'd also like to say an extra special thank you to
the people behind the scenes that do so much to arrange everything, from
organising the venue to the flights and accommodation and everything
else in between. Events like this wouldn't be possible without your
help.
