---
author: 'mal'
title: 'Building a chat system using core.async and server-sent-events'
description: 'Notes from a training course'
category: 'clojure'
layout: '../../layouts/BlogPost.astro'
publishedDate: '2015-04-24'
heroImage: 'chat-system.jpg'
tags:
  - 'training'
---

import { Image } from '@astrojs/image/components'

Last week I spent an exhausting yet enjoyable two days Clojure training
with some experienced Clojure pros.

# Day 1: Building the chat-server

The course started by introducing core.async and building up its
concepts one at time, from buffers, channels, go-blocks and finally on
to transducers.

We came up with some ideas for what a transducer might do in the context
of a chat system.

- Censor profanity, using a filtering transducer

- Auto-correct text, using a mapping transducer

- Emoticons

- Code formatting

Compared to the channel operations they replace, the nice thing about
transducers is that you can test them with ordinary sequences before
applying them against a core.async channel.

```clojure
(sequence my-cool-transducer
  ["Hello!" "How are you?" "What's the latest score?"])
```

In order to get started quickly with the REPL, we generated a project
using the **sse** template at [modularity.org](http://modularity.org).
This creates a project structure based on
[component](https://github.com/stuartsierra/component), ideal for firing
up a fast-feedback development workflow for writing servers. The **sse**
template also adds dependencies on the stuff we needed. Less hacking
around on setting up the environment means more fun with core.async.

We had soon developed the code to put chat messages onto a channel and
take them off. The template provided a simple webpage under `/events/`
which allowed us to POST messages to the server, which in turn would put
messages to a core.async channel.

We then added a `go-loop` to take chat messages from the channel and
publish them, first to the console, and then as server-sent events via
http-kit.

import tr from '../../assets/blog/training3.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={tr} />

All the code for this can be found in our
[chatserver](https://github.com/juxt/chatserver) repository.

# Day 2: Building the chat-client

While a component-based setup works great for building servers, rapidly
creating front-end user-interfaces calls for a different approach.

We generated a project skeleton using [Martin
Klepsch's](https://github.com/martinklepsch) excellent
[tenzing](https://github.com/martinklepsch/tenzing) template. This
provides a [boot](http://boot-clj.com/)-powered workflow with a
fantastic feedback-cycle for seeing the results of your ClojureScript
efforts immediately in the browser.

    boot dev

## A browser REPL

The tenzing approach also includes a browser-REPL.

From within the project directory :-

    boot repl --client
    (start-repl)
    (js/alert "Look at me!")

Helped greatly by our productive tooling, we plunged into ClojureScript
and Om. Many of the team had no real experience with JavaScript or
building front-end apps. But everyone got stuck in and we made steady
progress, first with one Om component, then splitting it up into 3 with
a core.async channel between the input box and the messages panel.

## Putting it all together

Separating the work for building the server API from the work required
for the front-end feels like a good split. For example, when you're
building a front-end, it would help to pair-up with a UX designer, but
this isn't necessary for back-end work.

But you still want to be able to integrate the two ends on your dev
machine. Since both the front-end file server and back-end chat server
were configured to listen on port 3000, we had to reconfigure the latter
to use port 3001.

However, running the modular and tenzing servers on different ports
presented a more difficult problem. AJAX calls from the front-end to the
server API fell foul of Cross Origin Resource Sharing (CORS) rules built
into today's modern browsers (for very good reasons).

import tr2 from '../../assets/blog/training2.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={tr2} />

Fortunately, I had anticipated this being an issue and had purposely
speeded along the CORS support in our [yada](http://yada.juxt.pro)
library. Of course, there are plenty of established options to implement
CORS in Ring servers, but I also wanted to demonstrate how easy it was
to turn a core.async channel into a fully compliant HTML5 server-sent
event feed, thanks to the magic of the
[manifold](https://github.com/ztellman/manifold) library that yada is
built upon.

Using this feature meant we had to replace http-kit with
[aleph](https://github.com/ztellman/aleph), but thanks to the
similarities between the respective
[modular](https://github.com/juxt/modular) components meant that the
code changes were minimal.

The enclosing component had already established a core.async mult, used
to distribute messages to multiple consumers. This was stored under the
**:mult** entry of the component record. Therefore, the code to create
the server-sent event implementation was straight-forward :-

```clojure
(yada
  :allow-origin true
  :events
  (fn [_]
    (let [ch (chan 256)]
      (tap (:mult component) ch)
      ;; Send a test message
      (go (>! ch "It works!"))
      ;; Return the core.async channel
      ch)))
```

Not only was this code smaller and more readable that the http-kit
equivalent, it also benefited from propagating back-pressure from a
client connection. The result is back-pressure applied all the way back
to the browsers sending the chat messages.

Once the code was in, it was time to test it.

    curl -i localhost:3001/events/events

Having the REPL on the server meant we could easily add test messages to
the channel, since the channel was part of the system map, and the
system map was so easily accessible from the REPL :-

```clojure
(clojure.core.async/put! (-> system :sse-demo-events-events :channel) "Test message!")
```

(Note: it's very handy being able to turn common expressions like this
into convenience functions in `dev.clj`.)

Once the server output had been verified, we hooked up the chatclient
and the CORS errors disappeared. By the end of the course, almost all of
us had fully functional web-based chat systems. Not bad for a few hours
effort and a lot of fun too.

import tf from '../../assets/blog/training-fun.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={tf} />

Again, all the code for the ClojureScript chat client can be found in
our [chatclient](https://github.com/juxt/chatclient) repository.

# Can we help?

If you'd like to receive this kind of training from JUXT, just let us
know, we'd be happy to help. Whether you'd like a course for beginners,
or something to challenge seasoned Clojure devs, don't hesitate to get
in touch (info@juxt.pro).
