---
author: 'jon'
title: 'Just a techie?'
description: 'Techies, Devs, Boffins and Geeks'
category: 'analysis'
layout: '../../layouts/BlogPost.astro'
publishedDate: '2018-11-09'
heroImage: 'just-a-techie.jpg'
---

As soon as I hear the word _techie_, I feel an emotion-cocktail of
frustration and despair, with a sprinkling of betrayal. Subdued through
repetition this negative response may be, it's nevertheless a call to
action. A call to protect the techies (myself included), and a
requirement to be vigilant about the state of the project.

I recall decades ago reading a _red-top_ newspaper in the UK called
\"The Sun\", and whenever it talked about a scientific matter (rarely),
it would refer to the scientists as _boffins_. It was a mechanism to
dehumanise this class of people, so that the fact that they are clever
and coming up with ideas, doesn't matter on a personal level. They're
not like you and me and we're not inferior to them - in need of being
challenged on our life-choices - as these people are simply just
_boffins_!

So it goes with _techies_. This is a bunch of people who just love to
geek out and play with computers. Just make sure you've got adults in
the room to shepherd them and to talk to them on your behalf. There's a
knack to it.

It's not simply the insidious dehumanisation and the patronising that
bothers me - which to be fair, is a human condition - rather it's the
attempted commoditisation of what is a highly specialised trade. When
you trivialise a trade, you make the trades-people interchangeable.

This isn't a them-vs-us thing, because inside of our collective
profession, we regularly do it to ourselves. There's a destructive
pattern inside of Agile software development of squashing individualism.
Devs can't be trusted to work solo, so pair them up. Devs can't be
trusted to think holistically about the problem at hand, so each _story_
needs to be written child-like. We demand TDD, a convoluted code-review
and branch process, and antipatterns such as _the big ball of mud_
terrify us, so we must insist on nano-sized microservices to promote
code shared ownership and polyglot diversity, so that each service can
be rewritten at any time in any language, and no single developer can
possibly ever become a bottleneck.

This is at the grass-roots level. The problem gets worse when the _scrum
masters_ are landed, promoting slogans such as _my job is to make myself
redundant_ and _I want to create self-organising teams_, and then they
do the exact opposite. I'm not sure who coined the term _story drones_,
but it neatly portrays what is so common on large projects with all the
trimmings of project managers, business analysts, iteration managers,
architects, and then finally the developers.

In the morning a soul-crushed developer will be paired up with another -
perhaps using _pair stairs_ - then will be given a story of 2-3 velocity
points worth, will have a _story huddle_ with all the senior project
cast, will have a coffee to take a breath, will open the JIRA ticket and
read the acceptance criteria, will have another huddle to correct the
assumptions made in the first huddle, will correct the JIRA ticket, will
go to lunch, will get another coffee, will glance at the build monitors,
then will finally start engaging in _ping pong_ TDD, where one person
writes the unit-test, and the other makes the test pass. Later, a solo
developer will refactor most of it.

What's the solution? We could start by giving up on the dream of
developers all being equal in ability, who can then be traded as
commodities. Developers have different strengths - some are fantastic
systems thinkers, some are drawn towards architecture, and others
possess a laser focus on delivery. Some are better at communicating,
whilst some just want to think deeply about the problem and to ponder
every edge case.

If developers are recognized as individuals and emboldened with trust
and freedom, then they will play to their strengths to give an overall
multiplying effect. We can embrace individualism rather than chasing it
away, by celebrating and raising up the role of the software developer.

I want my boffins and techies to be seen as surgeons. They know what
they're doing and you're in safe hands. We've got junior doctors in
there also to learn, but the junior doesn't become the senior overnight.
When we've got top surgeons the results will speak for themselves, and
the good news is that the top surgeons aren't required in such large
quantities. This can make everyone happy.
