---
author: 'mal'
title: 'Edge'
description: 'A complete Clojure project you can leap from'
category: 'clojure'
layout: '../../layouts/BlogPost.astro'
publishedDate: '2016-07-05'
heroImage: 'edge-02.jpg'
tags:
  - 'open source'
---

import { Image } from '@astrojs/image/components'

The best way to learn any programming language is to start a project to
solve some problem. The problem drives you forward, getting you to think
about how to apply your new-found knowledge, and you automatically learn
the language along the way.

One of the questions we hear a lot from people wanting to dive into
Clojure is, \"How do I set up a Clojure project?\".

Many beginners have to invest too much of their time learning the
tooling rather than the language.

That's why projects like [Luminus](http://www.luminusweb.net/) are so
useful. You can get set-up with the minimum of fuss and focus on working
on your problem (while learning the language).

Another worthy mention is [Mastodon C's suite of Clojure
projects](https://github.com/mastodonc), who open-source a lot of
complete real-world projects.

By their very nature these projects are full of opinions of what general
problem to solve, which libraries to use and how to organize your code.
That's why it helps if there are a selection to choose from.

# Introducing Edge

Edge is a project from JUXT that helps you get started with a simple
website, API or micro-service. You can put it in the same mental box
marked _frameworks_, along with Luminus, Hoplon, Chestnut and Arachne.

Edge is not a template system, you don't generate the project with
`lein` or `boot`. You just `git clone` it and type `boot dev` to run it.
As things are moving fast (both in Edge and in the Clojure world as a
whole), we think it's good to retain the ability to merge Edge updates
to your own project.

There's not much code in Edge, around 500 lines, but it's packed full of
features and built on solid engineering principles like _loose
coupling_\', _single responsibility_, _don't repeat yourself_ and
_separation of concerns_.

Some of our decisions need explaining, so here's goes.

## Structure

Edge uses Stuart Sierra's infamous
[component](https://github.com/stuartsierra/component) library for
structure.

On balance, we prefer it to [mount](https://github.com/tolitius/mount),
for many of the reasons [explained
here](https://www.reddit.com/r/Clojure/comments/41p73n/contrasting_component_and_mount/).
(We much prefer both _component_ and _mount_ to the traditional practice
of sprinkling \`\`def\`s in random namespaces.)

## Web libraries

Edge uses [bidi](https://github.com/juxt/bidi) for URI routing and
[yada](https://juxt.pro/blog/posts/yada-1.html) for handling web
requests, both JUXT libraries.

Good websites and APIs should make liberal use of hyperlinks, but you
don't want those hyperlinks to get stale and break. While bidi _can_ be
harder to learn and use than Compojure, it allows you to iterate your
API design freely. Hardcoded URIs can be a form of implicit coupling, a
short-cut to code-rot. As every true developer knows, every time you add
an implicit coupling to your code-base a fairy dies -- so using bidi
also helps to keep fairy populations healthy.

import fa from '../../assets/blog/fairy.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={fa} />

Edge makes a great springboard for a micro-service. It contains a small
RESTful phonebook app, and there's even a [Swagger
UI](http://swagger.io/) included, so you can communicate your API design
to your team. And because it's built with
[yada](https://juxt.pro/blog/posts/yada-1.html), clients will think
you're an HTTP protocol guru.

## Configuration

Real-world projects invariably need some application configuration
mechanism to specify the details of the operating environments in which
they run.

Again, Edge uses our own [Aero](https://juxt.pro/blog/posts/aero.html)
library - it's easy for small projects that just need a single
configuration file, based on Clojure's own EDN format. Plus Aero throws
in some features that allow it to scale as your project evolves. Maybe
we're a little biased but we think this is the most ideal balance of
trade-offs for configuration.

## Network REPL

Edge launches a network REPL, so you can remote debug your service while
it's running. The service is bound to localhost only for security
reasons, the idea is that you connect to it via [ssh
forwarding](http://blog.trackets.com/2014/05/17/ssh-tunnel-local-and-remote-port-forwarding-explained-with-examples.html).

import ps from '../../assets/blog/phonebook-swagger.png'

<Image alt='image' src={ps} />

## Security

Since Edge is built with [yada](https://juxt.pro/blog/posts/yada-1.html)
you'll have good security defaults built-in: parameter validation, HSTS,
flexible authentication, ABAC/RBAC authorization and access control
options.

## Tooling

Edge has chosen to adopt [boot](http://boot-clj.com/), rather than
Leiningen (although we wouldn't say no to a Pull Request!)

Web projects are becoming more complex these days, with the need to
support for ClojureScript and CSS compilation, flexible packaging and
deployment, and other concerns. We find boot is somewhat harder to use
but more flexible than lein, and allows you to run more within a single
(expensive) JVM. While we are still in a phase of experimentation,
_boot_ makes sense.

## Database

Edge is agnostic about databases. There are so many choices from
traditional relational databases to graph and key-value stores. Since
there are no stateful objects, there is no need for an ORM and no need
for Edge to offer opinions as to how you go about persisting data.

There is, however, a database component that works as a place-holder for
whatever you want to use.

## HTML templates

Hiccup is great for generating HTML snippets, but for whole pages we
prefer templating solutions. We've picked Selmer for Edge, but it is
easy enough to unpick and go with an alternative such as enlive or
Stencil (Mustache).

Selmer is a Django-inspired template library. We like its rich library
of built in functions and the ease of adding custom ones.

## ClojureScript

As you might expect, Edge has all the modern boot-powered ClojureScript
tooling. You don't have to care how it works, you can just start launch
a browser, hack the `.cljs` code and see your app take shape. Automatic
browser reload, HUD and browser REPL are built-in too.

## CSS

import pf from '../../assets/blog/phonebook-form.png'

<Image alt='image' src={pf} />

These days, all the cool kids are using CSS compilers like
[Less](http://lesscss.org/) and [Sass](http://sass-lang.com/), and for
Edge we've opted for Sass. The process is seamless: you edit the files
in Edge's `sass` directory and voila, your changes are automatically
reflected in the browser.

# When to use Edge

Edge is designed to help you get _up and running quickly_. For that
reason it's ideal for _dojos_, _training courses_ and _hackathons_. It's
great for knocking up a quick micro-service to impress your friends (or
your boss!).

The best thing is you'll have something up-and-running in minutes.

# How to use Edge

Here's how to get started:

    git clone https://github.com/juxt/edge
    cd edge
    boot dev

Wait until you see the message:

    INFO  edge.server - Started web-server on port 3000

Then browse to http://localhost:3000

There's a [README](https://github.com/juxt/edge/blob/master/README.adoc)
to explain how to launch Edge with CIDER or other IDE. If you're not
using those, you can always connect a REPL to port 5600. Either way, you
can type (reset) to get quick code refresh.
