---
author: 'alx'
title: 'Introducing the JUXT Cast'
description: ''
category: 'podcast'

publishedDate: '18 Jul 2019'
heroImage: 'podcast.jpg'
tags:
  - 'clojure'
---

## We're making a podcast!

I'm going to go a bit further into why we're doing this below but if
you're short on reading time and just want to jump straight into an
episode, check out the links below.

- [Overcast (for iOS)](https://overcast.fm/itunes1471141263/juxt-cast)

- [Pocket Casts (for Android)](https://pca.st/0n5o)

- [Raw RSS Feed](http://feeds.feedburner.com/JuxtCast)

- Coming to our website soon!

## Why do we even need a podcast?

Now you may be thinking, \"but you already have a blog, why do you need
a podcast?\" and its a good point. However there are still many more
interesting ideas and conversations that we have, during lunch, or at
the pub, which aren't quite right for the blog format but we still think
_more people should have access to this_.

And that's where the podcast comes in. It's simply another outlet for us
at JUXT to discuss our open source projects, debate with one another
about whatever the latest office arguments are (maybe someday someone
will make a convincing argument for vim?) and just generally allow any
employee to pick up the mic and have a voice about anything.

## The JUXT approach to _digital media_

For me it became immediately clear that JUXT was somewhere I wanted to
work after I was researching the company during my interview stage 2
years ago and stumbled upon a
[video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vIDjyTnocMU) of Jon interviewing
Sam Aaron while Malcolm attempted to punt a boat down a river with the
grace of a somewhat tipsy penguin - or promoting XT16 while jumping on a
[trampoline](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=f1Ip7bGlnb4) - or hanging
off an amusingly small [rock climbing
wall.](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Rlv24H-MI6g) It just seemed so
_genuine_.

So much of the digital media that companies put out these days
completely fail to convey any sense of character. It seems as though its
often commissioned by a marketing department who contract some third
party production company who film actors or use stock footage/images to
produce an end-product that could literally be used for any company in
any industry.

So since joining JUXT I've always wanted to become more involved in
producing more of this type of content. The sort of thing that actually
represents our company values, rather than just the vague risk free _Our
company values are to be a good company! And also to not be a bad
company! (with stock photo of smiling suits)_.

The problem these companies face is that producing quality content is
actually quite difficult. It takes a significant amount of time and
equipment to produce something that actually looks professional, and for
a lot of companies a professional look and feel is a necessity, and its
significantly cheaper for them just to hire some professionals to do it
for them. However, this isn't the JUXT way. We do almost _everything_
ourselves, from our HR system to putting together our own computers and
desks, and we're proud of it!

Now, there is a big difference between writing software to handle our HR
and creating a new podcast or video series. Software is literally our
business, we all know how to do it and we do it well. Making a podcast
however is a little out of our comfort zone, but we're sticking to our
goal of producing it 100% independently so that we can maintain that
feeling of authenticity and transparency which is

We'll also be adding a lot more content to our [YouTube
channel](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UC5G6p4wwKuDKZsgDrbp5j5A?view_as=subscriber).
As well as videos of our podcast recording sessions, we're in the
process of documenting some of our internal procedures which we're
making public for no real reason other than _why not?_.

You can see the first example of this in our secure password generation
procedure [here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pHwYgTX9tNs). And don't
forget to check out (and subscribe) to our podcast, its on all of the
[major podcasting
services](https://overcast.fm/itunes1471141263/juxt-cast).
