---
author: 'dmc'
title: 'JUXT Journal 2019-06-14'
description: ''
category: 'clojure'

publishedDate: '14 Jun 2019'
heroImage: 'journal.jpg'
tags:
  - 'journal'
---

# Crux

- We've released a new version: \"19.06-1.1.0-alpha\", the changes are
  listed below.

- Malcolm and Jeremy were interviewed by Daniel Compton on episode #24
  of [The REPL podcast](https://www.therepl.net/episodes/24/).

- The Crux team will be giving a talk at the Strange Loop conference
  in Missouri this September, \"Temporal Databases for Streaming
  Architectures\".

## Crux night in London

Next Tuesday we are delivering a London Clojurians hands-on workshop for
Crux (generously hosted by Funding Circle!), with free pizza and
t-shirts featuring John McCarthy: [visit the meetup.com
page](https://www.meetup.com/London-Clojurians/events/262005356/).
Already 80 spaces are taken and tickets are available on a first come
first serve basis, get yours before they run out.

Here's the agenda:

- Introductions

- Lightning Talks

  - Tick by Malcolm Sparks

  - Bitemporality by Jon Pither

  - Crux 101 by Jeremy Taylor

- Q&A Panel

- Hands-on Tour

- Food & Drink

You can see the [slides](/crux-workshop-v1.pdf) online now.

The core development team will be giving a talk describing the
architecture and features of Crux, followed by a code-along session
giving you a chance to use Crux yourself. You will come away with an
understanding of Crux's datalog, extension points, and the value of
bitemporality in a database.

## Crux changes

CAS and Put now do not require a duplicated ID to be placed into both
the document and the op, it's now only specified once in the op. This
makes the API much friendlier, and reduces unnecessary user burden of
duplication.

There were a number of internal bug fixes which you can find the details
of in the
[changelog](https://github.com/juxt/crux/blob/b13a98ec8b7ec897d7e1c3738a812c10f88f6224/CHANGELOG.md).

# Edge

There was an investment into solving some of the UX issues that Emacs
users experience when using `cider-jack-in-clj&cljs`. If you typed
`(go)` into your Clojure REPL, you would end up getting a port conflict
exception. Eventually it turned out to be a [race
condition](https://github.com/bhauman/figwheel-main/issues/183) in
figwheel-main as you would restart the server underneath it, and it
would try to helpfully start one. Until that issue is resolved, Edge now
has a workaround for this problem.

[Lucio](https://juxt.pro/people/lda.html) updated the default Edge app
template with a nicer set of default CSS.

Edge got a new [site](https://juxt.pro/edge/) and a redesigned UI for
the documentation set to go with it. As the templates for the Edge docs
are now custom, the hope is that we can do more useful things with it.
One things that's already implemented are convenient \"Suggest and
edit\" links on every page. We also want to explore the idea of
\"expanding snippets\" which will be more self contained in order to aid
in creating tutorials.

Speaking of Edge docs, several new articles were added:

- [How Edge Works Under the
  Hood](https://juxt.pro/edge/docs/under-the-hood.html) explaining how
  Edge works to de-mystify it.

- [Creating Your First
  Component](https://juxt.pro/edge/docs/first-component.html), a short
  tutorial on creating a simple component

- [Dev logging](https://juxt.pro/edge/docs/dev-logging.html) setup
  documentation

- [Lifecycle](https://juxt.pro/edge/docs/lifecycle.html) was expanded
  to include a section on how you can modify your Edge

There were a few minor bug fixes too:

- Fix for newer Clojure's which was broken in some setups by only
  loading piggieback into ClojureScript projects (which would
  otherwise bring in an ancient ClojureScript)

- Remove the hard-coded \"edge\" from the test-all function

- Prevent the dev-extras namespace from being unloaded when reloading
  initially fails

# Aero

We did some major work on the internals of Aero. This restructure
resolved all of the open bugs in Aero due to a new way of handling
collections. We're still testing it on some client projects, but initial
results look good. If you have a complicated config.edn, we'd be
interested in hearing if this [pull
request](https://github.com/juxt/aero/pull/77) works for you.

The new approach enables a new kind of tagged literal in Aero config
files, these behave more like macros. The built-in Aero conditionals
like `#or` and `#profile` have been migrated to this new API. Due to the
existence of this new API, deferreds can now be deprecated. Deferreds
were a workaround for the lack of true conditionals in Aero, and they
had severe limitations such as non-composability.

There's an alpha namespace available, which will allow you to create
custom macros, but the API may still see some revisions.

With this work out of the way, it's now possible to start looking into
namespacing the tagged literals in Aero. Namespacing will be an
opportunity to avoid breaking changes while improving behavior. For
example `#include` does not throw if the file being included does not
exist, but `#aero/include` may do so.
