---
author: 'hug'
title: 'Load testing with Gatling and Clojure'
description: 'DDOS for fun and profit'
category: 'clojure'

publishedDate: '23 Oct 2018'
heroImage: 'mock3.jpg'
tags:
  - 'AWS'
---

> Yes, it works, but will it scale?

I've gotten so used to the reliability of Amazon autoscaling groups and
load balancers that, the one time I left their comfort zone, I didn't
have a good tool to answer that question. Nor does there seem to be a
simple, cheap, industry-standard solution.

# The use case

You have a website or web API. You want to see how it behaves when a few
thousand users hit it with simultaneous HTTP requests - specifically,
how many of these requests fail or are severely delayed. You want those
results displayed as pretty graphs, both for your own convenience and to
impress your clients.

In addition, you don't want to run that test from your local machine.
Your data would hopelessly confuse website performance issues with your
office's faulty internet connection and the twelve tabs of YouTube
videos you forgot you were streaming in the background. This is clearly
a job for cloud computing.

Finally, you don't want all these users to show up at the same time. AWS
autoscaling groups are designed to handle a gradually increasing load,
not a sudden 10,000 users spike. The same is true of the load balancer
itself (which quietly autoscales under heavy load). Amazon
[recommends](https://aws.amazon.com/articles/best-practices-in-evaluating-elastic-load-balancing/)
that you increase the load \"at a rate of no more than 50 percent every
five minutes\". (The entire article is well worth reading.) You might
also be interested in ramping _down_, to test scale-down behaviour.

# Existing options

For this basic use case, [**RedLine13**](https://www.redline13.com/)\'s
\"simple test\" proved almost sufficient.

It's very easy to set up, and while the paid subscription is expensive,
the free tier already provides most everything you need. It doesn't have
ramp-down, but that can be achieved through its Gatling integration. I
wasn't familiar with Gatling at the time though, so I looked elsewhere.

Clojure runs through the soul of JUXT, so I experimented with
[**clj-gatling**](https://github.com/mhjort/clj-gatling), a Clojure
wrapper around Gatling.

I quickly ran into its limitations. It is not a full wrapper; in fact it
covers very few of Gatling's many functionalities. In particular,
clj-gatling [currently](https://github.com/mhjort/clj-gatling/issues/25)
does not support time-based ramp-up. The completion-based ramp-up it
offers is a poor substitute and behaves unreliably. As for
[clojider](https://github.com/mhjort/clojider), its AWS integration, I
did not manage to get it to work at all.

It ultimately convinced me to use [**Gatling**](https://gatling.io/)
directly.

Even with no knowledge of Scala, it isn't too hard to figure out how to
write simple simulation scripts. It also comes with a tool that detects
your browser activity and turns it into a simulation script - though
this does not play nice with HTTPS.

What it doesn't have is a convenient way to run it remotely on AWS.
RedLine13 would work, but since I didn't realise that at the time, I
ended up writing my own tool.

# Introducing Ramp

[Ramp](https://github.com/juxt/ramp) is an open-source shell script +
AWS CloudFormation template to simplify remote load testing. In one
command, it spins up an EC2 instance (or reuses the existing one if it
hasn't been terminated), sets it up for Gatling use, runs the Gatling
simulation script provided, and uploads the report to an S3 bucket.

Since that report is a nicely formatted HTML file, and since S3 buckets
can be used as static websites, you can see the report on your browser,
with all its glorious multicoloured graphs. Or share it with a colleague
or client.

Ramp comes with a Scala simulation script that does a basic load test
(spamming a URL with GET requests, with ramp-up and ramp-down). I have
since used it to simulate more complex behaviours, including mass
registration and log-in. Writing more sample scripts is on my to-do
list, but Gatling has decent documentation on its own website.

(I didn't realise before just how _easy_ it is to make a website
unusable via DDOS attack. Poor caching, poor autoscaling, poor
[ephemeral port
management](https://making.pusher.com/ephemeral-port-exhaustion-and-how-to-avoid-it/),
there are any number of potential weakest links. Implementing load
testing in all JUXT projects as a matter of course is, well, a load off
our minds.)

# Future plans

[Raffi Krikorian](https://twitter.com/raffi) (of Twitter and Uber fame)
pointed out to us that it's quite hard to create a simulated user that's
as, shall we say, _unpredictable_, as the real thing. Even if your
simulation script is quite complex and makes full use of your website's
various subsystems. Ultimately, it's still written by an engineer who's
making assumptions about how the website is _supposed_ to be used.

Real users click a button five times in a row because they think the
page is too slow to load. Or go back a page right in the middle of
execution. Or refresh a resource-intensive page every second as they
impatiently wait for news.

Gatling is a valuable tool to find out how your website handles _load_,
but isn't enough to be certain it'll handle _users_. For that, you
should ideally capture the behaviour of multiple real users, and replay
_that_ thousands of times on your staging site.

At JUXT, we've yet to tackle a project that has to scale as much as a
Twitter or an Uber - but we're slowly moving in that direction and are
starting to feel a need for this sort of testing. We don't have the
tools for it but we're investigating options.
