---
author: 'rkb'
title: 'Machine Learning With Clojure'
description: 'Hello Machine Learning World!'
category: 'AI'

publishedDate: '27 Mar 2018'
heroImage: 'mock3.jpg'
tags:
  - 'machine-learning'
  - 'clojure'
---

From the past 3 blog posts on Artificial Intelligence
([AI](https://juxt.pro/blog/posts/artificial-intelligence.html)),
Machine Learning
([ML](https://juxt.pro/blog/posts/machine-learning.html)) and Deep
Learning ([DL](https://juxt.pro/blog/posts/deep-learning.html)), you
should by now, have an idea of the basics. I hope I have whet your
appetite by the potential for ML, but the some of apprehensions that

surround it too.

The good news is that you are still interested! So the next natural step
is to ask, \"How can I start Machine Learning myself, and build an AI
that'll do all my coding for me?\" (Or ... is just my dream?) Luckily,
there are many open sourced resources such as _TensorFlow_, by Google,
_Amazon Lex_, _Polly_ and _Rekognition_, by Amazon and Microsoft's
_Cortana_ (are you getting the idea?), to name but a few.

# TensorFlow

[TensorFlow](https://www.tensorflow.org/get_started/get_started),
released in November 2015, is an open sourced library by the [Google
Brain Team](https://research.google.com/teams/brain/). Originally called
DisBelief, Google uses TensorFlow across a range of it's products and
services. From the obvious, deep neural networks for search rankings, to
the subtle, automatic generation of email responses and real time
translations.

The main language for Machine Learning, for much of it's history, is in
Python, as it is built upon C/C++. Python also has a very well developed
and powerful scientific computing library
[NumPy](http://www.numpy.org/), allowing users to do very efficient and
complex neural networks with relative ease. Due to the longevity of
Machine Learning's relationship with Python, the community is strong and
libraries are rich.

But, \"what if I don't want to use the bad concurrency models in Python
and use the sane concurrency model in Clojure?\" I hear you cry!
Luckily, TensorFlow has just released it's [Java
API](https://www.tensorflow.org/api_docs/java/reference/org/tensorflow/package-summary).
Although it is still new and comes with a warning that it is
experimental, you have the first in-roads to TensorFlow and Clojure.
Along with the majority of Java libraries, TensorFlow has it's own Maven
Repository so getting started with TensorFlow in Clojure is as easy as
adding

```clojure
[org.tensorflow/tensorflow "1.1.0-rc1"]
```

to your project and then

```clojure
(ns tensor-clj.core
  (:

(defn myfirsttensor []
  (println (str "I'm using TensorFlow version: " (TensorFlow/version))))
```

Comparing the TensorFlow [Python
API](https://www.tensorflow.org/api_docs/python/), to the TensorFlow
Java API, you will immediately see a massive disparity in the libraries
available, making operations that are relatively straightforward in
Python, difficult in Java and hence Clojure.

However, for computing matrices and other statistical operations, Java
has a wealth of options such as [ND4J](http://nd4j.org/getstarted). If
you'd rather use a Clojure Library, there is
[Incanter](https://github.com/incanter/incanter/wiki),
[Core.Matrix](https://github.com/mikera/core.matrix) or
[Clatrix](https://github.com/tel/clatrix) that can have similar
capabilities.

An alternative option is to do your TensorFlow operations (or Machine
Learning Operations) in Python and simply call you results in Clojure.
The beauty of programming is that you are not penned into one language,
you have the ability to choose based on your personal preferences.

For an interesting article that goes into more depth about Clojure, Deep
Learning and TensorFlow, follow
[here](http://benkampha.us/2016-02-22.html).

# Amazon Services

Amazon have recently released 3 different Deep Learning sources, _Lex_,
_Polly_ and _Rekognition_.

## Amazon Lex

[Amazon Lex](https://aws.amazon.com/lex/) is a service used for
conversations by either voice or text. It comes with a ready-made
environment allowing you to quicky make a natural language \"chatbot\".
Amazon Lex comes with slack integration so you can build a chatbot in
any case you desire (it can respond to any pesky chat messages on your
behalf). The technology you'd be using with Lex is the same that is used
by [Alexa](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Amazon_Alexa). This means the
text and voice chats are tried and tested, being used in a commercially
viable product that can be bought by you and me.

With Lex, the cost is \$0.004 per voice request and \$0.00075 per text
request, so you are able to a large number of interactions with you
chatbot for a low cost.

## Amazon Polly

[Amazon Polly](https://aws.amazon.com/polly/) is a service that turns
text into speech. Polly uses deep learning technology to turn text
(words and numbers) into speech. It sounds like the human voice and can
speak 24 languages. You are able to cache and save the speech audio to
be able to be replayed it when you are offline, or if you want
distribute it.

For Polly, you pay per character converted from text to speech. As you
have the ability to save and replay speech, for testing purposes the
cost is low.

## Amazon Rekognition

[Amazon Rekognition](https://aws.amazon.com/rekognition/) is used for
image analysis. The \"Hello World\" equivalent for deep learning is
MNIST, classifying images of dags and cats. Rekognition gives you the
ability to do just that, with the added benefit of visual search. The
technology is actively used by Amazon to analyse billions of images each
day for [Prime Photos](https://www.amazon.com/photos/home). A deep
neural network is used to detect and label the details in your image,
with more labels and facial recognition features continually being
added.

Testing with Rekogntion allows you to analyse 5000 images per month and
store 1000 face data each month for 12 months.

Coming from Amazon, Lex, Polly and Rekognition come ready with
integration into your existing Amazon infrastructure, and are able to
coexist with other Amazon WebServices such as S3 and Elastic BeanStalk.

All 3 Amazon products are now available for you to test. All you need is
an Amazon account and you are up and running.

The products are out-of-the-box, meaning you can easily get them up and
running, having a simple working product in a short amount of time.
However, due to this ease of starting up, it means the learning gradient
of customisation is steeper.

# Cortana

Microsoft's
[Cortana](https://support.microsoft.com/en-gb/help/17214/windows-10-what-is),
released in 2014 as a competitor to [Google
Now](https://www.google.co.uk/landing/now/) and
[Siri](https://www.apple.com/uk/ios/siri/) is a digital personal
assistant for Windows 10, Windows 10 Mobile, Windows Phone 8.1 Microsoft
Band, Xbox One, iOS and Android. Cortana provides many different
services:

- Reminders and Calander Updates

- Track Packages, Flights

- Send Emails and Texts

- Access the internet

Cortana uses [Microsoft's Cognitive
Toolkit](https://github.com/Microsoft/CNTK) (CNTK), a Python based deep
learning framework which allows a machine to recognize photos and videos
or understanding human speech by mimicking the structure and functions
of the human brain. Using CNTK, you have access to ready-made
components, the ability to express your own neural networks. You are
also able to train and host your models on Microsoft's alternative to
Amazon Web Services, [Azure](https://azure.microsoft.com/en-gb/).

# Cortex

A Clojure library for neural networks is Cortex. An excellent article on
the capabilities of cortex can be found
[here](http://gigasquidsoftware.com/blog/2016/12/27/deep-learning-in-clojure-with-cortex/)

As it is written in Clojure, Cortex has the obvious benefit of being
easily integrable into your current application. However, it doesn't
have the same backing of major companies nor the longevity of other
frameworks. An advantage is that Cortex is being actively developed with
improvements being made consistently. If you want a more tried and
tested framework to begin your deep learning journey, Cortex may not be
the right framework for you, rather something for you to come back to
once you have a better understanding.

# Other Machine Learning Systems

There are many more ML and DL frameworks such as Caffe, Theano, and
Torch. Caffe is targeted at mass markets, for people who want to use
deep learning for applications. Torch and Theano are more tailored
towards people who want to use it for research on DL itself.

# Caffe

[Caffe](http://caffe.berkeleyvision.org/) is a deep learning framework,
created by Berkeley AI Research. It is Python based that gives
Expressive Architecture, Extensible Code, Speed and already has an
established community.

## Advantages:

1.  High Performance without GPUs

2.  Easy to use - Many features come \"Out-of-the-Box\"

3.  Fast

## Disadvantages:

1.  Outside Caffe's Comfort Zone, difficultly increases massively

2.  Not well documented

3.  Uses 3rd party packages so may lead to versions skewing

# Theano

[Theano](http://deeplearning.net/software/theano/) is also a Python
Library. Although not strictly a Deep Learning Framework, it allow you
to efficiently evaluate mathematical expressions with multi-dimensional
arrays. Theano, works along the same lines as TensorFlow, using
multi-dimensional arrays as tensors. Theono uses automatic
differentiation on a neural network, which is the bases of
backpropagation.

## Advantages

1.  Lazy Evaluation

2.  Graph Transformation

3.  Supports Tensor and Linear Algebra Operations

4.  Gives a Good Long term understanding

5.  Developed and helpful community

6.  Automatic Differentiation (When you look into the Mathematics behind
    Neural Networks, you begin to realise how much time and effort this
    saves!)

## Disadvantages

1.  Can get Stuck in the Nitty Gritty Details

2.  Graph Optimizations increase the compilation time

3.  Long Overheads due to Optimizations

# Torch

[Torch](http://torch.ch/) is a Machine Learning Library, released in
2002, based on [Lua](https://www.lua.org/). Torch also provides an
N-Dimensional Array (Tensor) that has the basic operations for indexing,
slicing, transposing, type-casting, resizing, sharing storage and
cloning. Torch is maintained and used by a variety of companies,
including [Facebook AI
Research](https://research.fb.com/category/facebook-ai-research-fair/),
Google's [Deep Mind](https://deepmind.com/) and
[Twitter](https://cortex.twitter.com/).

## Advantages

1.  Flexibility and Speed

2.  Torch Read Eval Print Loop ([TREPL](https://github.com/torch/trepl))
    for debugging. If you are coming from a programming language that
    already utilises the power of the REPL, then you can see the
    immediate benefits.

3.  Provides ports to MAC, Linux, Android and iOS

4.  Written in [Luajit](http://luajit.org/) which is a
    [JIT](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Just-in-time_compilation)
    language, so there is almost zero compilation overhead for the
    computational graph. It is extremely easy to integrate Lua with an
    existing C/C++/Fortran code.

5.  Very easy to create a (deep) neural nets right out of the box
    without additional libraries

6.  Actively developed

## Disadvantages

1.  Written in Lua so not accessible to many people

2.  Doesn't have complete automatic differentiation

For a more comprehensive comparison across multiple deep learning
software's, go
[here](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Comparison_of_deep_learning_software).

# To Conclude ....

Although it's been around for a while, Machine Learning and Deep
Learning have only come to the fore-front of the programming world in
the past 5 years. People were just starting to test the waters at the
beginning of the century and so much has happened in a small amount of
time.

Now we come to Clojure. Clojure is even younger, so the community doing
both Clojure and Machine Learning is very small indeed. Luckily Clojure
has Java and all it's resources to fall back on. As Machine Learning and
Clojure separately become more popular the community using both
technologies will grow alongside.

The Deep Learning Libraries and Frameworks I have provided in this
article are by no means an exhaustive list. They have their own subtle
differences, enough for you to make your own personal choice. However,
it is
I feel these are some great choices to get you going.
