---
author: 'oly'
title: 'Evolving user interfaces'
description: 'Educate users with re-learn'
category: 'clojure'
layout: '../../layouts/BlogPost.astro'
publishedDate: '2017-01-10'
heroImage: 'user-interface.jpg'
tags:
  - 'open source'
---

import { Image } from '@astrojs/image/components'

We've all said it while using a website, immediately realized we sound
like our parents and recoiled slightly in horror as the full implication
sinks in:

> I used to be able to do this, but they've moved the button and I can't
> do it anymore

We're getting old, no longer able to adapt to change and in danger of
being a victim of natural selection as the young and fit outcompete us
in cyberspace. This isn't quite as melodramatic as it might sound -
imagine a grocery website which you rely on to deliver food to you where
you simply can't find the order button anymore.

We shouldn't be putting people in this position. Let's talk about how we
should evolve user interfaces by allowing change without breaking the
user experience.

# The greatest power user ever seen

As a developer of a UI you are the greatest power user ever seen: you
know where everything is, the full gamut of functionality, all the
keyboard shortcuts and the fastest way to achieve everything. In
addition, you work with other people who are also power users by virtue
of their connection with the product and collectively you will suffer
from several [cognitive
biases](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_cognitive_biases) when
making decisions about how to evolve and improve the product's UI. It's
easy to forget that your real users only know how to use some of your
product's features, may use them without fully understanding them and
rely on familiarity to use them efficiently. Yours is just one of many
UIs they use in their job and life and they will be frustrated by any
idiosyncracies in your design which they have to struggle to remember.

Change is the only constant: you need to be able to update your product
with new features and constantly improve it to keep ahead in the game.
You make these decisions on a daily basis, discuss them constantly with
your colleagues and keep your team updated in your standups.

Your actual users, on the other hand, will know nothing until one day -
not necessarily the day of release, but possible weeks or more later -
they get dumped on them not just your one change but many changes
written by many developers all in one go! They may find themselves
frustrated and alienated if their previously familiar workflow no longer
works and irritated that they have to work out what changed and how they
can continue doing what they need to do. If you've made it onerous or
even impossible they may start looking at other products that better
suit their requirements.

Here are four ways of mitigating this scenario and making sure you can
continue to evolve your user interface without alienating your users:

# Consistency

Display and behavior are inextricably linked - if something looks like
a button, you expect to be able to click on it to perform an action
described by a couple of words or maybe a self-explanatory icon. These
relationships come from the physical world and are empirically intuitive
to humans through hundreds of years of design.

import md from '../../assets/blog/material-design.png'

<Image alt='image' src={md} />

This physical emulation was embraced by Google with their [Material
Design philosphy](https://material.io/guidelines/). This is an
interesting read for anyone involved with UI design even if you don't
use Material in your product.

> A material metaphor is the unifying theory of a rationalized space and
> a system of motion. The material is grounded in tactile reality,
> inspired by the study of paper and ink, yet technologically advanced
> and open to imagination and magic. Surfaces and edges of the material
> provide visual cues that are grounded in reality. The use of familiar
> tactile attributes helps users quickly understand affordances. Yet the
> flexibility of the material creates new affordances that supercede
> those in the physical world, without breaking the rules of physics.

One of the original aims was to provide a more consistent experience for
users of Android, both within and across apps and the operating system
so that any user has an initial familiarity with any application on
which to build.

If your product has a consistent interface then your users will find
they can use new features because they behave in ways that are
consistent with features they already know how to use.

# Data-driven decisions

You should capture metrics and statistics on behavior - read [Frankie's
excellent discussion](https://juxt.pro/blog/posts/logging.html) on that
topic. When you have this data at your disposal you can have informed
discussions about what features are popular, rarely or never used and
how people access them.

import ga from '../../assets/blog/google-analytics.png'

<Image alt='image' src={ga} />

When you want to add a button for a new feature you will know which
other actions need to be visible and in primary positions versus those
which could be moved to secondary positions to make room for your new
one instead of simply holding your finger in the air and making a guess.
You can find data on the most popular options for an action and use
these as defaults so that the user can just press go without having to
twiddle toggles into the same state every time, reducing clicks and
increasing efficiency.

You should continue to monitor the same metrics after the release as a
comparison to make sure you improved rather than worsened the user
experience - you should see the same goals accomplished with fewer
clicks and page views If you have a statistically significant user base
you can couple this with A/B testing and safely test ideas out when
there is no obvious way forward.

# Stack half full

In any team there are those with a stronger affinity towards front-end
work and those who prefer the back-end. This is natural and should not
preclude any developer from working across this boundary but once this
divide starts to appear it can widen rapidly as work starts to be handed
off across the boundary and each side feels less involved in the other.

If you feel that front-end work is harder to do, sit with someone who
feels more comfortable with it and talk through their decision making in
building the UI. There are often implicit patterns which they can make
explicit for you, removing the mystery and explaining how you can
integrate your changes to the front-end work while adhering to the
overall look and feel.

# Education

However intuitive your product it is likely that some education of your
users will always be required once it evolves beyond the trivial. They
can be divided into two camps: brand new users who are trying your
product for the first time today and need to explore its functionality
and long-time users who need incremental updates on the new features and
changes.

Traditional approaches - the thick reams of a guide or FAQs are daunting
and difficult to use for both groups. For them to bear any relation to
the UI requires up-to-date screenshots or short videos, protracted
descriptions or step-through sequences which the user must memorise
before switching back to the UI to try it out. This example from
Facebook contains several steps referring to a form you may or may not
see, a sign up button you might have to click twice, a mysterious final
step and so on which could easily be broken by a simple change to the UI
such as, for example, changing the button to read \"Create account\"
instead of \"Sign up\".

import fh from '../../assets/blog/facebook-help.png'

<Image alt='image' src={fh} />

The developer as well will struggle to keep guides up-to-date as it's
hard to even know when you've invalidated them with your code changes.
Once you embark on updating the guide the effort of re-recording a video
or taking a new sequence of screenshots will quickly discourage you from
making change and your user experience will stagnate.

# re-learn

To help make user education easier and inspired by help bubbles which
appear in products by Google, Twitter etc I wrote a library called
[re-learn](https://github.com/oliyh/re-learn) with the following aims:

- Display \"lessons\" on the UI right next to the elements they
  describe

- Define the lessons as data right next to the code that creates the
  elements

- Support incremental introduction of new features to existing users

- Work with UIs built with React and require no dom manipulation or
  special markup

You can try the live demo at https://oliyh.github.io/re-learn/ to see
the functionality for yourself. Here's a short video of the demo in use: https://oliyh.github.io/re-learn/.

It requires that your UI is written in reagent but nothing more and
produces simple markup which you can style as you please using your own
CSS.

A lesson can be defined for a reagent component in the following way:

```clj
    (require '[re-learn.core :as re-learn])

    (def todo-input
      (re-learn/with-lesson
        {:id          :todo-input-lesson
         :description "Add new todo items by typing here, pressing the Add button to save"
         :position    :bottom
         :version     1}

        (fn [] [:div
                [:input {:placeholder "What needs to be done?"}]
                [:button "Add"]])))
```

With the documentation right next to the actual element, it's easy to
keep it updated.

The lesson will appear to the user like this:

import rl2 from '../../assets/blog/re-learn-initial.png'

<Image alt='image' src={rl2} />

Because the lesson appears on the UI and points to what it refers to
it's easier for the user to understand and provides much more context.
When the user has \"learnt\" the lesson it is stored in local storage
so that they won't see it next time they use the product.

If we decided to make the UI cleaner by removing the Add button and
letting the user just press Enter instead - a change which could be
confusing enough as to stop people using the product - we can simply
update the `description` and increment the `version` number of the
lesson:

```clj
    {:id          :todo-input-lesson
     :description "Add new todo items by typing here, pressing Enter to save"
     :position    :bottom
     :version     2}
```

Users, old and new, will be shown the lesson so that they understand the
new behavior:

import rl3 from '../../assets/blog/re-learn-updated.png'

<Image alt='image' src={rl3} />

For new users, the features of your product are displayed in simple
steps as they start using it, allowing them to discover all the features
and giving them confidence. Existing users are kept abreast of your new
features as they are introduced without having to delve into
documentation or release notes.

Paying attention to these areas of UI design - consistency, data-driven
decisions, familiarity with the UI's principles and user education
should allow you keep evolving your user interface without fear of
alienating your users.

[re-learn is on Github](https://github.com/oliyh/re-learn), feedback and
contributions are very welcome.
