---
author: 'juxt'
title: 'Clojure and Electric Bikes'
description: 'A case study of building the infrastructure for an electric powered bikes scheme'
category: 'case studies'

publishedDate: '29 Oct 2015'
heroImage: 'mock3.jpg'
tags:
  - 'clojure'
---

# Electric Bikes

[Ride On](http://www.ride-on.es/en/) is a public bikes scheme with a
difference. The advantage with Ride On bikes is that they are electric,
meaning that the bike itself will help you pedal. This has positive
implications for the environment because less trucks are needed to move
the bikes from station to station, as people will cycle uphill as well
as downhill.

The evidence suggests that people use electric bikes more than standard
non-powered bikes, and so this helps to reduce city traffic, whilst
giving the rider a happier experience.

It's a win-win and a hugely exciting project. At JUXT we're thrilled to
be a part of it.

# The Scope and Timescales

Each docking station has a user facing touchscreen kiosk providing
registration and ability to add credit to their NFC touch cards. When
bikes are docked and undocked using a touch card, the station will
validate and broadcast every event to a remote server.

Working alongside the client, JUXT provided the initial software for the
public facing docking stations, as well as the software for a central
server platform. The Ride On team have a specialist set of engineers for
building the hardware micro-controllers operating the physical docks. In
parallel a separate development team would build a public facing
web-application and mobile platforms, that would interact with the
central server through REST calls.

An MVP needed to be built in a matter of months, an extremely ambitious
target.

# Why Clojure?

Immutability was a core requirement. Ride On didn't want to ever lose
data, and so reports and dashboards should be materialised views on
immutable events. Clojure was therefore seen as a good fit for its
functional approach when it comes to working with data.

Clojure was also chosen because development teams can go _at speed_ on
greenfields software projects, and the resulting codebase will be
simpler and leaner.

There wasn't the time for building software in the mainstream style,
with costly large object models to maintain and to dependency manage.
Here the emphasis was on delivering business value pragmatically, and to
production grade.

# ClojureScript

We used ClojureScript for the touch screen application. Although Kiosks
have traditionally been built using specialist vendor based SDKs,
ClojureScript in the browser has so far been an excellent choice. We
could rapidly develop it using
[Figwheel](https://github.com/bhauman/lein-figwheel), and because the
Kiosk's server-side application is also written in Clojure, we get the
benefits of both front-end and back-end development using the same
stack. We could develop quickly, evolving our solution without the
coordination overhead of involving separate teams. The library support
was also essential, using APIs such as
[Tower](https://github.com/ptaoussanis/tower) for internationalisation.

We also used ClojureScript for the central server, receiving data from
all the docking stations. Using [Om](https://github.com/omcljs/om), we
built a dashboard showing real-time events (propagated via HTTP Server
Sent Events) and hardware status information, for example to show the
battery charge of a bike connected to an individual dock.

The use of ClojureScript allowed for rapid development, which has become
a lot easier, owing to growing maturity of the tool set.

# Interacting with Hardware

We needed to write software inside the Kiosk to interact with physical
card-dispensers, printers, and other devices. Here the [Component
pattern](https://github.com/stuartsierra/component) was vital in
life-cycle managing the various ports we needed to open. We used
[Gloss](https://github.com/ztellman/gloss) to represent the binary
messages being passed back and forth.

We didn't automatically choose Gloss, but after a short amount of time
it became clear that Gloss was an essential component of the stack. It
would be a serious anti-pattern to have raw hex definitions spread
across your codebase, as we quickly found. When you have a name-space of
crisp and clear Gloss packet definitions, looking beautiful and easily
understandable, then you know you've hit upon the simple-made-easy
Clojure way.

We used ZeroMQ to communicate with the docking hardware
micro-controllers, each running specialist firmware.

# Working with Data

The production systems we use at JUXT typically rely on Prismatic's
[Schema](https://github.com/Prismatic/schema) to some degree. We coerced
incoming JSON payloads against our declared Schemas, reporting anomalies
if we receive an event we cannot understand.

We used [Compojure-api](https://github.com/metosin/compojure-api) to
give us a Swagger endpoint describing our RESTful services. This gave us
a self-documented API we could pass on to downstream consumers.

# Conclusion

The timescale was tight, and there were many moving parts that all had
to land together. The project has been successful and is ready to power
Ride On's electric bikes going forward. Look out for Ride On bikes in a
city near you!
