---
author: 'jam'
title: 'The Big Acquisition'
description: "What Nubank's Cognitect Acquisition Means for Clojure"
category: 'analysis'

publishedDate: '09 Aug 2022'
heroImage: 'the-big-acquisition.jpg'
---

A technological revolution is going on in Brazil. In 2011, [only 56% of
Brazilians had a bank
account](https://www.statista.com/statistics/898974/population-bank-account-type-brazil/).
Brazil was estimated to be the most capital-intensive country for
banking in the world, and is thought to have (even now) a highly
dysfunctional credit system, which is extremely congested particularly
for small and medium sized companies.

Today, those numbers are up substantially. Despite having [an inflation
rate of over 11%](https://tradingeconomics.com/brazil/inflation-cpi),
and serious political turmoil, something is changing. Brazil now has the
one of the largest numbers of FinTech startups of any country in the
world. A handful of superstar FinTech businesses are rocking the world,
following in the footsteps of e-commerce giant MercadoLibre by creating
supercharged financial ecosystems on a massive scale. Serial
entrepeneurs are taking Brazil from a country that has historically been
infamous for scams and massive wealth discrepancy, to one of the most
interesting economies in the world (well, [in my
opinion](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=J_r-FJyGDXM)).

One of the prime examples of this revolution is Nubank. For those who
don't know, Nubank is a _Neobank_, which means it operates almost
exclusively digitally, without physical branches. This asset-light model
allows Nubank to drastically reduce operating expenses. Its primary
founder, David VÃ©lez, a young Colombian, began Nubank in 2013 after
noticing a handful of banks controlled the majority of Brazil's markets
and realising how horrible the experience was. The lack of competition,
he felt, led to a lack of innovation, and this inspired him to start
Nubank. Only a few years old, it now has over 48 million customers
(growing exponentially) in Latin America, and has been an investment
target of Warren Buffett since pre-IPO. Moreover, the average age of
users is significantly below that of other banks.

What makes this even more impressive is that Nubank did all of this
without expanding outside of Latin America, and with a policy of [zero
marketing
spend](https://thelowdown.momentum.asia/how-to-win-22-mil-customers-with-no-marketing-spend/) -
relying entirely on word of mouth to grow. How? They focused entirely on
improving their technology and offering. In their words, \"We are a
technology company, it's in our DNA, not a bank.\"

As one of the first pioneers of the ongoing transformation of the
Brazilian financial system, you might not be surprised that Clojure is
Nubank's weapon of choice. Clojure and Nubank share a few similarities,
after all. Both are very modern. Both are highly streamlined. Both are
piloted by highly intelligent and contrarian leaders, and aimed at
undermining stagnant legacy systems. Nubank's motto? \"Fight complexity
to empower people\". Through looking at Nubank's previous open source
work, it clearly excels at building horizontally scalable microservices,
and claims that because services in the financial domain closely
resemble mathematical functions, functional programming is a natural
fit. They say that they've eschewed the boilerplate and verbosity of
other languages, in favour of simple constructs. And they aim to keep
their codebase understandable locally, and practically testable. It's
clear from their numerous articles that at Nubank, engineers are just as
passionate about software as every other Clojure engineer I have met
(and as an old-fashioned Lisp programmer looking in, Clojure developers
have something of a reputation for being, let's say, **pretty
dedicated**).

So as a finance dweeb, and a software engineer, I was very happy to find
out that Nubank had [acquired
Cognitect](https://building.nubank.com.br/welcoming-cognitect-nubank/)
(and by proxy, Rich Hickey). I think this was a very smart decision on
their part. If **I** was leading a large financial firm, I would also be
acquiring high-level consultants who specialise in (and in this case
created) the technology I use. I've joked to colleagues before that if
they could, I'm sure Jane Street would acquire the entirety of French
academia. One might be concerned that this could threaten Clojure's
status as an open source licensed language, but that's not really
something to be worried about. Nubank know very well about the

acquisition, conversely, is to fund Clojure and Datomic's development,
and receive continued support from Cognitect on architectural decisions.
It's not wrong to be concerned about the ethics of a large company when
it makes an acquisition, but Nubank has a history of continued open
source library output and does not benefit at all from stifling
Clojure's adoption. One can look at libraries such as the popular
[workspaces](https://github.com/nubank/workspaces) for an example of the
kinds of tooling a large company with access to bright minds can provide
to a language's ecosystem.

So why doesn't Nubank keep all its software to itself or create a fork
of Clojure? Firstly, Clojure is owned by neither Cognitect nor Nubank.
It is [open source, with Rich Hickey controlling its
trajectory](https://building.nubank.com.br/welcoming-cognitect-nubank/)-
so no need to be concerned as to the locus of Clojure's progression. On
the other hand, perhaps people may be wondering about what Nubank may be
able to do **for** Clojure. The fact is that [open source is good for
tech companies](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WrQYZdzA4hg). It's no
wonder that two of the best open source developer tools, GraphQL and
React, both came out of Meta, which itself is actually a highly
controversial company. The reasons are quite simple. Meta has never been
afraid to hire outside of narrow pools, and it's never been afraid to
invest in architecture that doesn't appear to have a direct use-case.
Meta's competitive advantage is its willingness and ability to attract
the best developers and to act outside the norm. Jane Street, mentioned
earlier, [dominates the OCaml ecosystem](https://github.com/janestreet).
A company the size of Nubank could do something similar for Clojure,
especially given it is a fast-growing force that shows no signs of
slowing. Who knows what in the future will be powered by Clojure?
