---
author: 'oly'
title: 'Through the looking graph'
description: 'Experiences adopting GraphQL on a Clojure/script project'
category: 'clojure'

publishedDate: '02 Mar 2018'
heroImage: 'mock3.jpg'
---

# The journey

This is a short yet rambling tale of my experiences adopting GraphQL on
a somewhat mature project: a Clojure server and Clojurescript front end,
two years old with a current team of 5 developers. I discuss where we
started, why we chose to adopt GraphQL, the libraries we used, the
mistakes we made, how we feel about it now, and some advice on eating
cake.

# Where we came from

The application in question is relatively straightforward: it is a UI
for displaying, in a hopefully coherent and intuitive manner, large
amounts of financial data which is calculated by other applications.

The data can be logically described as a graph, albeit the special kind
of graph known as a tree. It is fetched by the server from many other
upstream applications and glued together into the tree that made most
sense to our customer, users and developers - what will henceforth be
referred to as the canonical form.

The domain is quite complicated, so let's use an analogy and say that
our tree represents a sport, comprising of divisions, teams and players.
Here's how it looks:

The vast majority of data in the graph resides in the lower layers

The graph is quite bottom heavy in terms of volume of data - there are
only a handful of divisions and teams, but many players per team who
play large numbers of games and generate a lot of statistical data per
game.

The industry-standard way to represent a large amount of financial data
is to throw it all into a large table with all the numbers visible at
once and make the poor user scan it constantly for the one or two bits
of information they actually need to know.

We wanted our application to be more valuable and helpful to our users.
With an engaged product owner we designed screens which could
meaningfully aggregate the fine-grained data and compare it to
business-driven rules, resulting in a simple green-for-good or
red-for-bad representation that directed the user's attention to the
relevant places. Imagine a division summary showing the top 3 teams and
5 most valuable players, or a team screen showing each player and their
best and worst statistics for the most recent game. There's no need to
drown the user in data! The relevant facts are a tiny fraction of the
total:

Highlighting the bits of data that
are actually relevant to the user: a tiny fraction of the total

We decided early on to keep things very simple and simply transfer the
entire graph from the server to the client at the start of a new client
session, and keep it up-to-date via delta payloads sent over an SSE
channel. We then derive streams of data on the client for each view
which select the appropriate slices (we use the excellent
[re-frame](https://github.com/Day8/re-frame) for this). This gave us a
number of benefits:

- One mental model to work with on both the server and client -
  developers can move seamlessly between them

- Zero churn on the server/client API

- Code written to work with the graph was reusable on server and
  client

We are lucky that browsers have come far enough that tens of megabytes
of data can be consumed at a canter, making this approach possible. It
allowed us to think of the application using this very simple model:

All we had to think about on the server side was how to populate the
graph, and on the client side what and how to render _that same graph_.
We could forget that one side was a JVM process on some remote server
and the other was running on a Javascript engine in the user's web
browser and just think of the graph. Adding a new feature consisted of
populating the new field in the graph and then adding the rendering
code. This worked well for us - adding new screens to the app was simple
and quick, delighting our customer.

# Why we looked for something new

When you have a very tall cake it's easiest to
eat it in thin slices

Our graph of data was getting bigger and bigger as we covered more
divisions, more teams per division, and more games were played
generating more stats: the initial payload transferred to the client was
reaching 120mb (gzipped transit) and SSE updates were increasingly
frequent, putting load on the server and all the clients. Desktop users
started complaining of slowness getting in to the app, and it was even
slower for mobile users.

It was obvious that most of the data being pulled down wasn't needed all
at the same time. If you're looking at the home page you need to know
the names of the divisions and the names of the top teams in each
division. You don't need every player's statistics for every game
they've ever played! For any given view, you need a particular slice of
all your data - for high level overviews you need a wide but shallow
slice, and for detailed views you need narrow but deep slices. There is
no page on the app where we need all the data in the graph. The argument
for displaying only the relevant data to the user became the argument
for only fetching the data relevant to the display.

We wanted a way to reduce the data requirements of the client without
losing the benefits outlined above of having the canonical graph
everywhere. The views should be able to declare the minimal set of data
they need and we should be able to transfer just that while retaining
the canonical structure.

# Choices

Fragmenting our API into lots of little endpoints that each served a
specific page was an unappealing option; each would have a lot of
overlap but at the same time would not be reuseable or interchangeable
and would also mean churn across the server and client. Plus, it's
2018 - there must be something better!

Adding a server-side store like Datomic with pull requests sounded very
heavyweight - our \"database\" was just an in-memory atom containing
immutable data, and exposing the internal structure and relations of our
store sounded like it would make refactoring difficult.

GraphQL sounded good because as a specification rather than an
implementation it keeps our internals hidden, has plenty of third party
tooling and gives us a way to let the client decide what data it needs
from the server so we can tailor it to the views. It has a (draft)
subscriptions feature which we could use to push updates in the graph to
our client and rather fortunately there existed a Clojure implementation
called [lacinia](https://github.com/walmartlabs/lacinia) by Walmart Labs
which was already battle-tested in their production environment.

# First impressions

Initially tools like GraphiQL were flashy and exciting. I played around
with the [example GraphiQL](http://graphql.org/swapi-graphql/) and had
the feeling of being a pioneering explorer, slowly uncovering new parts
of the graph and enthusing about the possibilities of concise and
perfectly tailored data. It's simple enough that non-technical users
could use it to find their way around which could also be a great bonus
for business analysts and others close to the development team.

The next step was to spike our own little implementation into our
existing webserver - enter
[lacinia](https://github.com/walmartlabs/lacinia) and
[lacinia-pedestal](https://github.com/walmartlabs/lacinia-pedestal).
They are two excellent libraries that do all the heavy lifting for you,
requiring you to describe your graph as pure Clojure data and allowing
you to specify your resolvers as pure functions. It is implemented with
`clojure.spec` meaning if you make a mistake you usually get a nice
error message to help you fix it. We integrated it into our existing
pedestal server with very little fuss - we just included their
interceptors on the routes we wanted to serve the graph from, and it
sits alongside our Swagger API allowing us to migrate gradually.

lacinia does a great job of interpreting the query and dispatching to
your resolver and streamer functions to deal with returning the data. It
doesn't get in the way and is a great example of writing an extensible
library. One really nice feature is that you may declare a resolver
function for any node in the graph, giving you complete control over how
to partition your fetching: if you have a node which is expensive to
fetch, you only need to perform the fetch if the client explicitly
requests that field.

It was very exciting to make our first few queries, but almost my next
thought was

> do I really have to have camel or snake case for my keys?

The idiom in Clojure is for kebab-cased keys but this is not supported
in GraphQL because it wouldn't work for Javascript clients, which are
presumably the primary use case. This was quite a disappointment: these
keys pervade our UI code and would require a lot of rewriting just to
make it work again. We would also have to write a lot of transforming
code on the server to feed into lacinia!

I spent a while researching this and contemplating submitting changes to
lacinia but it was pointed out to me that tooling like GraphiQL, one of
the main selling points, wouldn't work. In an effort to introduce
GraphQL without having to rewrite all our UI code I came up with
[locksmith](https://github.com/oliyh/locksmith) which takes a lacinia
GraphQL schema and provides functions for efficiently transforming
between idiomatic Clojure data and GraphQL data.

I also searched, without luck, for a nice idiomatic Clojurescript
client. The reference [Apollo client](https://www.apollographql.com/)
was very Javascripty and could not be pushed into `cljsjs` due to the
way it is packaged. To this end I wrote my own client called
[re-graph](https://github.com/oliyh/re-graph) which handles queries,
subscriptions and mutations over HTTP and WebSocket. This, combined with
locksmith meant that the only changes really required in our client code
were to add the queries each component needed.

We initially used GraphiQL to write our queries to take advantage of the
autocomplete and pretty printing before pasting the big query strings
back into our client code. Formatting them with indentation quickly
became an issue and we looked into
[venia](https://github.com/Vincit/venia), but at the time it was missing
a feature we needed to alias nested keys. That feature is now present,
but our queries have not really changed since first writing them and the
urge to de-stringify them has faded.

# Mistakes we made

We set up our subscription to fire whenever our data store changed, as
this was the simplest thing to do. This re-runs the query and pushes the
data down the websocket to the client, keeping them up-to-date with the
latest state on the server. At busy times the subscription was firing
many times a second but executing the query was taking one or more
seconds resulting in a backlog building up and extremely high CPU. We
managed to end up with 40,000 threads all trying to execute queries,
unsurprisingly causing the application to grind to a halt. To protect
ourselves the subscription is now debounced to fire no more than once
every 2.5 seconds and I [proposed this change to
lacinia](https://github.com/walmartlabs/lacinia-pedestal/pull/56) to
stop unlimited threads being created and to drop superceded interim
values. The hard lesson is lacinia doesn't protect you from your own
performance issues - that part is up to you.

It also turns out that lacinia does not deduplicate subscriptions with
the same id, resulting, if you are not careful, in multiple threads
doing identical work to return identical data on the client side. We
have added deduplication inside our subscription streamer but I may also
propose this is incorporated into lacinia-pedestal. Another hard lesson:
lacinia doesn't protect you from bad clients.

We took the opportunity to simplify our graph which felt good but
increased the amount of work to do - it became a small rewrite rather
than a drop in solution. We thought if we don't do it now, it will be
harder later and we might never do it. In retrospect I wish we had
dropped in GraphQL as-is to get the benefits and do the refactoring
later, but we'll never know now which way was better.

In addition to the simplification we were also tempted to further reduce
the data transferred by shortcutting the graph and adding derived fields
like \"bestPlayer\" at the team level. This saves on data - to calculate
the best player you'd have to transfer data about all the players and
sort them on the client side - but it breaks our adherence to the one
canonical form.

Hidden logic or verbosity? The GraphQLer's
dilemma

This is a philosophical trade-off which we haven't balanced
satisfactorily yet. On the one hand it reduces the data requirements
even further and simplifies the client but on the other it complects
data and logic which seems to break the GraphQL paradigm of pure data
and explicit behaviour. I'm not happy with these derived fields but they
are a huge temptation when you own both the client and the server. I
think a better way would be to request the list of players as before,
but sorted by performance and limited to 1. The data structure remains
unchanged, is minimised, and the implicit server logic in the name
\"bestPlayer\" becomes explicit logic driven by the client.

Our client side code has also become slightly harder to re-use across UI
components because some functions rely on fields which we may have
forgotten to include in all the queries that use it. It took some time
to weed these out, but is an area where `clojure.spec` could help if we
had functions that failed if they were missing input fields that we had
missed from our queries.

# Overall impressions

lacinia and lacinia-pedestal made it very easy to get going with GraphQL
and the way our client code was arranged allowed us to migrate just a
couple of views, including the home page, as a spike. From spending 60+s
to transfer 120mb we now take a small fraction of a second to load a few
kilobytes. Our users are happy once again and we intend to migrate the
rest of the application and retire the SSE channel.

Performance is your responsibility and you need to think carefully about
your implementation, including the size of your graph, typical payloads,
frequency of subscription updates and number of concurrent users.

Finally real-life queries can seem very verbose - you have to explicitly
list every field you want back from the server, which is tiresome when
you want them all, but the lack of a wildcard is by design: you won't
get the benefits of GraphQL if you don't think about what fields you
want and why.

# What's next?

Our server gathers data from many other applications and in every case
each response returns more data than we want. This increases the load on
both us and the services we are calling; if they all had a GraphQL
endpoint we could drastically reduce the amount of data flying around.
Pushing the GraphQL revolution upstream is already something we're
looking into to help the next generation of applications and encourage
small and lightweight UIs that can easily be put together.

Performance is something we need to monitor carefully. The savings on
the client are offset to some extent by greater demands on the server.
I've put together a library called
[lacinia-gen](https://github.com/oliyh/lacinia-gen) which takes a
lacinia graph description and creates generators for the data with the
intention of using it to find hotspots and improve the overall
performance.

Refactoring of our graph specification is also something I'd like to
look into. It's hard to get it right and strike the right balance of
being useful and remain as just pure data, but I think pure data is the
way; time will tell.

The libraries I wrote for our GraphQL journey -
[re-graph](https://github.com/oliyh/re-graph),
[locksmith](https://github.com/oliyh/locksmith) and
[lacinia-gen](https://github.com/oliyh/lacinia-gen) - are all in active
use on our project and have served us well. All are on GitHub, and as
always feedback and contributions are very welcome.
