---
author: 'oly'
title: 'Visual testing'
description: "When there's something strange and it don't look good"
category: 'clojure'
layout: '../../layouts/BlogPost.astro'
publishedDate: '2019-05-02'
heroImage: 'visual-testing.jpg'
---

import { Image } from '@astrojs/image/components'

# A cautionary tale

So you've written your code and Everything Works. You have tests in many
flavours - the vinegary tang of units, the smoky meat of integration and
the exotic fruityness of acceptance tests, and they all pass. Everything
is just as it should be, so you ship it and head to the pub, a twinkle
in your eye as you reflect on a job well done.

Partway through recounting to your rapt colleagues how close a squirrel
came to knocking you off your bike that morning, you feel a buzz in your
pocket. You ignore it and continue the story but you've lost your
audience - everyone else is checking _their_ phones. Annoyed, you assume
some user hasn't been able to cope with some minor UI change and
panic-paged the whole dev team. You're mentally preparing your
aggressive squirrel impression to continue your story with when you read
the message with disbelief. It's from Stoffel, the hardworking support
veteran, who tells you that no one can see the app's menu and the US
offices of FuzzyKitten Inc will be unable to fill their quota of kitten
gifs that day.

# What happened?

Upon returning to the office, having (in your own mind) completely
convinced the security guard that you are totally sober, you bring up
your local development environment and find that the menu just isn't
there. An inspection shows that the DOM is indeed correct, but a last
minute CSS change to add a picture of a cat in a party hat celebrating
the company anniversary made the whole menu render off the screen where
it can't be seen.

You had such confidence that your app was functionally correct and could
be driven by your tests you forgot to ensure that it could be used by a
human.

# Who you gonna call?

The missing menu left a big enough hole in the UI that anyone familiar
with the system could have spotted its absence easily, but the automated
test and deployment pipelines have no human involvement. Having someone
test this sort of stuff manually would involve a tedious trawl through
the app, navigating to every page, trying to fabricate edgecases to make
sure everything displays properly.

We don't want any manual processes, though. Additionally we can already
use [devcards](https://github.com/bhauman/devcards) during development
to show us how the UI will render in a variety of cases, including rare
edge cases. All we need is an automated comparison of these to a known
\"good\" version.

[kamera](https://github.com/oliyh/kamera) is a library to help with
visual testing. It works on the concept of test \"targets\" which
consist of:

- A url (the \"actual\")

- A reference image (the \"expected\")

- Instructions for comparing the actual to the expected

kamera will use Chrome to visit the url and take a screenshot, then uses
ImageMagick to normalise and compare the actual and expected images. It
runs assertions with `clojure.test` and can then build a report of all
your targets that has a summary:

import su from '../../assets/blog/summary.png'

<Image alt='image' src={su} />

i. a detailed report for each target ...

import rc from '../../assets/blog/report-card.png'

<Image alt='image' src={rc} />

i. and a linked magnifier which helps you see exactly what the
differences are:

import ma from '../../assets/blog/magnifier.png'

<Image alt='image' src={ma} />

## with devcards

I find devcards a great way of demonstrating how the UI will represent
many kinds of data. You can see all your edge cases in one place and
code against the multiverse of all simultaneously occuring states,
rather than just the one you might see while navigating through your
app.

For this reason your devcards are a better test of the components of
your app than the app is itself. kamera has a devcards API which works
with figwheel-main to let you test all your devcards really simply.

With the following devcards source files:

```bash
test
└── example
    ├── another_core_test.cljs
    └── core_test.cljs
```

i. and a directory populated with reference images, named in the same
way:

```html
<!-- -->
```

    test-resources
    └── kamera
        ├── example.another_core_test.png
        └── example.core_test.png

i. you can run kamera to screenshot the devcards and compare to the
reference images with this:

```clojure
(ns example.devcards-test
  (:require [kamera.devcards :as kd]
            [clojure.test :refer [deftest testing is]]))

(deftest devcards-test
  (let [build-id "dev"
        opts (-> kd/default-opts
                 (update :default-target merge {:reference-directory "test-resources/kamera"
                                                :screenshot-directory "target/kamera"}))]

    (kd/test-devcards build-id opts)))
```

## without devcards

Although devcards are better tests of the app's components, there is
still room for asserting that the app itself still hangs together
properly. Think of it like unit testing vs integration testing - good to
have both as they serve different purposes.

kamera's core api exposes the \"targets\" discussed earlier, so you
could write a test for your app like this:

```clojure
(k/run-tests
 [{:url "http://test.my-app.com/"
   :reference-file "home-page.png"}

  {:url "http://test.my-app.com/help"
   :reference-file "help-page.png"}

  {:url "http://test.my-app.com/preferences"
   :reference-file "preferences.png"}])
```

You could also combine it with a webdriver test, making assertions as
you go.

# Aren't they brittle?

You may think that asserting on individual pixels in your app's display
is a step too far. I don't advocate that, and kamera is a little more
flexible.

For starters you can adjust the tolerance allowed to each image
comparison, adding leniency to avoid test breakage for changes which are
genuinely minor. Interestingly this lets you _prove_ that UI changes are
minor by the change in the test result.

By using devcards you also restrict the input dataset to one closely
linked to your UI, meaning you should be able to safely change business
logic without affecting your devcards. If you genuinely intend to update
the visual representation then you will need to generate a new
\"expected\" file - just copy kamera's \"actual\" file into your
resources once you have reviewed it and are happy that the change is
what you would like. Your commit now contains an image file showing what
your new UI code actually does!

kamera is a tool for visual testing. For ideas on comprehensive testing
of UIs have a look at [my last blog post](cljs-apps.html).

As always, [kamera is on Github](https://github.com/oliyh/kamera) and
suggestions, feedback and pull requests are more than welcome.

# What about that squirrel?

Weeks later, after employing kamera to test your application, you are
having a relaxed cycle home through a warm summer evening, the sun
dappling through the trees overhead and the quiet hum of your tyres
calming your mind. The sharp crack of on acorn hitting your helmet
startles you momentarily. Looking up, distracted, you fail to see the
small figure waiting for you on the path ahead...
