---
author: 'mal'
title: 'We need to talk about JSON'
description: ''
category: 'clojure'

publishedDate: '15 Aug 2019'
heroImage: 'json.jpg'
---

Like many in the Clojure community, I've considered JSON as a rather
horrible syntax (compared to the obvious superiority of
[EDN](https://github.com/edn-format/edn)).

As a configuration format, JSON is used almost everywhere: npm's
package.json, AWS CloudFormation, Hashicorp Terraform, Open API, .NET,
the list is endless.

For me, the worst issue is the exclusion of comments. Of all the
problems we're leaving to future generations, the complete lack of
explanation in the configuration files of future legacy software systems
must be among the most irksome. Understanding is good, clear
explanations are good; discouraging the use of helpful and clarifying
comments is inexcusable.

The situation would improve if developers stopped adopting JSON for
configuration files - and there are JSON-like formats available that are
much better suited to this task, such as [Hjson](https://hjson.org/),
[Jsonnet](https://jsonnet.org/), [YAML](https://yaml.org/) and others.
The downside of these is that they require special format reading
software which is rarely built-in to languages. At JUXT, we use
[Aero](https://github.com/juxt/aero), which we consider to be the best
of all worlds.

# Change the perspective

Let's start again and think about what JSON is:

```json
{
"list": ["string" {"map": {"key": "value"}}]
}
```

It's maps, lists, maps-of-lists, lists-of-maps, lists-of-lists,
maps-of-maps.

In fact, from a Clojure perspective, things couldn't be better: Clojure
is, hands down, the most adept language at processing this
near-ubiquitous format. Of course, we're a little bit biased at JUXT!

Back when everything was XML, and everyone wrote Java (or C#), I
remember working on a large project. We spent weeks (literally, weeks!)
working on serialisation and de-serialisation of data from XML into Java
and back. I/O is a critical part of any program. Getting data in and out
of a program shouldn't be that hard, and with Clojure and JSON it isn't.

+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Data format | Ideal processing language |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| CSV | SQL |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| SGML | DSSSL |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| XML | XSLT |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| JSON | CLJ/S (Clojure) |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

It's almost as if, behind the scenes, there's been this _Grand Lisp
Conspiracy_ to get everyone programming in Lisp, whether or not they
realise it.

By disguising itself with some ornamental punctuation, JSON has infected
the whole world with Lisp.

# JSON Schema

[JSON Schema](https://json-schema.org/) is an emerging standard which is
used to define the structure of JSON documents. It's mostly used to
validate that JSON documents conform to expectations. However, since
JSON allows anyone to define new keywords and add them to
_vocabularies_, I believe JSON Schema should be thought of as a more
general way of specifying meta-data.

When combined with meta-data, data takes on some magical super-powers.

One example is [Mozilla's React JSON Schema
Form](https://mozilla-services.github.io/react-jsonschema-form/) which
demonstrates a React component that can dynamically produce forms via
introspecting JSON data and its schema.

I believe there will be plenty of other uses of JSON Schema in the
future.

One example I'm particularly interested in is the use of JSON Schema as
a pull-syntax for our [Crux](https://juxt.pro/crux) database. JSON
Schema allows you to declare the structure of the document you want to
_pull_ out of Crux, Crux will perform the necessary graph queries
against its documents. The result documents will successfully validate
against the schema, as the query _is_ the schema.

# jinx

I wanted to explore the potential of JSON Schema to provide a way of
accessing metadata about documents in order to make the data more useful
and powerful.

Thanks to some help from some colleagues (in particular, Shivek Khurana
and Sunita Kawane), these explorations have resulted in a new
Clojure(Script) library called **jinx**, which provides schema-powered
capabilities, which of course includes validation. We're hoping this can
be used for a variety of applications, not just to validate data
documents but to access the annotations made via the JSON Schema
document.

A quick example:

```clojure
(juxt.jinx.validate/validate
  {"firstName" "John"
   "lastName" "Doe"
   "age" 21}
  (juxt.jinx.schema/schema
   {"$id" "https://example.com/person.schema.json"
    "$schema" "http://json-schema.org/draft-07/schema#"
    "title" "Person"
    "type" "object"
    "properties"
    {"firstName"
     {"type" "string"
      "description" "The person's first name."}
     "lastName"
     {"type" "string"
      "description" "The person's last name."}
     "age" {"description" "Age in years which must be equal to or greater than zero."
            "type" "integer"
            "minimum" 0}}}))

=>

{:instance {"firstName" "John", "lastName" "Doe", "age" 21},
 :annotations
 {"title" "Person",
  :properties
  {"firstName" {"description" "The person's first name."},
   "lastName" {"description" "The person's last name."},
   "age"
   {"description"
    "Age in years which must be equal to or greater than zero."}}},
 :type "object",
 :valid? true}
```

Our jinx library is still in ALPHA status but it would be great to hear
all feedback and comments. It's available on GitHub at
https://github.com/juxt/jinx.

# References

- https://arp242.net/json-config.html

- https://revelry.co/json-configuration-file-format/

- https://dzone.com/articles/why-json-isnt-a-good-configuration-language
