---
author: 'joa'
title: 'Working at JUXT'
description: 'What I did on my summer holiday'
category: 'culture'

publishedDate: '12 Oct 2018'
heroImage: 'mock3.jpg'
tags:
  - 'internship'
---

As my internship at JUXT is drawing to a close, I thought I would write
a post about what I have been doing with my time here. In so doing, I
hope to give you some insight as to what it's like to actually work
here.

My time was split between helping with a client project, working on an
internal project and onboarding graduates whilst writing up the JUXT
internal documents. I will start by going into a little detail about
each, and go on to talk about a few other things I have enjoyed whilst
working at JUXT.

# Onboarding & Documents

Upon starting, employees at JUXT are provided with a new Dell XPS 13
laptop and as a rite of passage, they are tasked with installing Arch
Linux. At the beginning of my internship there was no written standard
for this, and I was told it could take anything up to a week to get all
set up. Therefore it would be my job to perfect the Arch Linux
installation guide for new starters.

In the interests of compliance, JUXT have set out to create a
comprehensive library of policies, procedures, standards and
user-guides. The Arch Linux installation guide was to be one of these
documents.

The motivation behind getting complete documentation for the Arch
installation procedure is to ensure every employee has a laptop set up
in such a way that there would be no risk of exposing sensitive data, in
the event anything were to happen to it.

## Arch Linux Installation Guide

The installation guide starts with taking the new employee through the
encryption of their hard-drive, to render their laptop harmless in the
wrong hands. After this, there is a mandatory GPG set up and JUXT
provides us employees with a
[YubiKey](https://www.yubico.com/products/yubikey-5-overview/). This is
a nifty little device that sits on your keyring and plugs in to the USB
port when required. During the set up, the new starter is shown how to
move their private key over to the Yubikey, adding an extra layer of
protection -- since you cannot use your GPG key without having the
physical YubiKey and the PIN for it.

Having no prior experience with Arch Linux and with the lack of a
complete guide, the installation of Arch onto my new laptop was slow -
even with Malcolm guiding me through. Since then, I have onboarded 5 new
graduates, each time with a quicker installation of Arch Linux, and each
time improving the documents when new problems were encountered and
overcome. The last Arch installation went so smoothly first time, that
we had it done in time for lunch!

# A client project

When I wasn't onboarding graduates, I was able to gain experience by
helping on a client project. To begin with I was given basic tasks and
had a lot of support from my colleagues. But after a couple of weeks I
was able to take on more complex tasks with confidence.

The learning curve at JUXT is steep, especially if, like me, you have
little prior experience. This is because being part of a small team it
is
environment here is such that you are surrounded with experienced people
who are more than willing to help. They do this by not simply showing
you how, but explaining why we do something a certain way. It is for
this reason that, although faced with a huge amount of new information,
I was not daunted by it.

Whilst working on the client project, not only did I learn Clojure, but
I picked up a number of transferable skills. Emacs, git and writing
asciidocs are all things I can take away and use on other projects.
Being trusted to pick things up as I went along helped me learn much
faster than if I had just been doing small classroom style problems.

# A library written by JUXT

My final task for the client project was to port it over to JUXT's time
library, [tick](/tick/index.html). Tick had already been used internally
at JUXT, but this was the first client project to use it. I had a lot of
fun doing this, and plan to write another blog going into more detail
about my experience bringing it into the project.

After I had done this, I created a
[cookbook](/tick/docs/index.html#_cookbook) for the tick documentation.
I could use what I had learned during my time porting tick into the
client project to give some real examples and uses for the library. I
was left to my own devices for both the port and the cookbook. There was
help if ever I needed it, but the fact I felt more than comfortable with
this solo mission was a testament to how far I'd come in the last couple
of months.

# Extra curricular activities

On Tuesdays we played Badminton at the National Badminton Center, which
just so happens to be in Milton Keynes. Once a week, usually on a
Friday, we had team lunch, where we headed over to \"The Hub\" (the
hippest place to be in Milton Keynes). As well as getting fed for free,
it was great to hear about the different projects everyone was working
on. Back in the office, there is a foosball table. This gets used
frequently and everyone that played was suspiciously good. Like _really
good_. They have a league.. I was no match for their superior skills.

It is clear JUXT care about their employees well-being. They have
managed to find the right balance between a relaxed environment and
productive workplace.

# What do I have to show for my time working at JUXT?

My degree is in Physics, so I was not sure how well I would get on in a
developer role. My main goals when starting the internship were to get
some relevant experience and find out if this really is the industry I
wanted to work in. This internship has far surpassed my expectations. I
have come away with a great amount of experience, learned a new language
and improved my badminton skills. In the short 3 months I worked here,
JUXT has given me the confidence and skills to pursue a career in
software development.
