---
author: 'mal'
title: 'Meet up with Karsten Schmidt'
description: 'If you go down to the woods today...'
category: 'clojure'
layout: '../../layouts/BlogPost.astro'
publishedDate: '2016-07-21'
heroImage: 'meet-karsten.jpg'
---

import { Image } from '@astrojs/image/components'

The Clojure language draws together a diverse set of talents that makes
for a great community full of inspiring developers.

A good example is Karsten Schmidt. Karsten has been a big influence on
me and others Clojure devs I know. He combines a passion for creative
programming with extraordinary accomplishment, demonstrating that there
are few limits to where you can go and what you can do as a programmer.

I first met Karsten in London when he was busy preparing for an [art
installation](http://postspectacular.com/) at the Barbican Gallery in 2014. I later visited the exhibition and saw his work first-hand.

import de from '../../assets/blog/toxi-devart.jpg'

<Image src={de} />

import pr from '../../assets/blog/toxi-print.jpg'

<Image src={pr} />

The installation centered on a 3D printer protected by a 3-story high
enclosure. Pedestals surrounded the enclosure, each holding an iPad
running a software application for creating 3-dimensional objects. The
software was written in ClojureScript, with a beautiful [user
interface](http://devartcodefactory.com/) (which itself could be
considered a work of art).

Visitors to the exhibition, many of whom were children, created 3D
objects using the software and submitted them to the 3D printer. The
best creations were showcased in a display cabinet against the wall. I
took a picture of one of these (these top two images seem computer
generated, but they are actual photos).

import en from '../../assets/blog/toxi-enclosure.jpg'

<Image src={en} />

It's almost impossible to see from the photograph, but on the left-hand
wall is a small door leading to a small dark room where Karsten spent
many days setting up the exhibit, working conditions that were hardly
better than Michelangelo's when he was working on the (2D) ceiling of
the Sistine chapel.

# Building blocks

In his 2001 essay, [The Roots of
Lisp](http://www.paulgraham.com/rootsoflisp.html), Paul Graham describes
the _discovery_ of Lisp as _a landmark in the history of computers_.

> \"John McCarthy ... did for programming what Euclid did for geometry.
> He showed how, given a handful of simple operators and a notation for
> functions, you can build a whole programming language.\"

Alan Kay once described Lisp as the \"Maxwell's equations of software\".

As Clojure developers, we believe this approach to building complex
systems is more relevant today than ever. You reduce things down to
atomic building blocks, which you can then compose together to form
incredibly complex structures, such as computer systems or biological
organisms.

As Graham's point suggests, there is a deep symmetry between geometry
and Lisp which Karsten demonstrates in his work, both _visually_ and, by
choosing to work in a Lisp, in the code itself.

# Literate Programming

import br from '../../assets/blog/toxi-branch.jpg'

<Image src={br} />

Karsten has a rare, if not unique, programming style. He writes all his
libraries using Knuth's Literate Programming style, where the code is
written in snippets interwoven with the documentation. From this
documentation (written using Emacs's _org-mode_ format), Karsten
generates both Clojure and ClojureScript sources which are then
compiled. So not only is his source _open_, but _accessible_ too.

The best example is his [geom](https://github.com/thi-ng/geom) library,
which starts by defining points and lines, gradually forming rectangles,
bezier curves and
[quaternions](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quaternion), meshes, matrix
transformations, and just keeps going. If Euclid was alive today, I bet
he'd be a Lisp programmer (and maybe a ClojureScript one!)

As Paul Graham also remarks in the same essay:

> \"It seems to me that there have been two really clean, consistent
> models of programming so far: the C model and the Lisp model. These
> two seem points of high ground, with swampy lowlands between them.\"

There are many other 3D libraries (arguably derived from the _C model_
that can produce similar results to _geom_, but what makes _geom_ stand
out is its Lisp foundations which enable playful creativity, discovery
and experimentation in a world of 3D. This is a reoccuring theme that we
are exploring at XT16, more on that later!

import sj from '../../assets/blog/toxi-sjo.png'

<Image src={sj} />

Ever since I discovered _geom_ and Karsten's other libraries I've wanted
to spend some time learning the basics, and perhaps one day to
experience the power of wielding _geom_ on real-world projects. So
earlier this year I booked myself on one of Karsten's [unique
courses](http://thi.ng/). The particular course I chose was on WebGl in
the browser with ClojureScript, since I'm interested in combining WebGL
in my applications and see the browser as the catalyst to a new wave of
consolidation between 3D-graphics and business user-interfaces.

The course was excellent and hugely fun, yet challenging too and I took
away an enormous amount of practical knowledge. I could explain more
about the course here, but Karsten's already published a [great write up
of
it](https://medium.com/@thi.ng/workshop-report-hi-perf-clojurescript-with-webgl-asm-js-and-emscripten-a545cca083bc#.ps9y4gui1).
I loved experimenting with the code and trying out things: \"what
happens if I change this value to X\" and the browser reload kicking in
and showing me. But watching Karsten's wizard-like prowess with these
libraries was something to behold. (If you want details on Karsten's
future courses, see [here](http://workshop.thi.ng/)).

# Meet Karsten at XT16

Jon Pither and I caught up with Karsten recently in his home borough of
Highgate, North London to talk about Karsten's work, philosophy, current
projects and his upcoming talk and live-coding at XT16. We entered the
woods (what Karsten calls his _office_) and had some fun building a
makeshift tripod for the camera. You can eaily tell that Karsten's
appreciation of Nature influences and inspires his programming work.
video::gxwy9XNrXRc\[youtube\]

We're very excited that Karsten is coming to our [XT16
event](https://juxt.pro/XT16.html) in the Autumn and giving a talk with
some live-coding. Due to the intimate nature of the conference there'll
be plenty of opportunity to meet and socialise with Karsten (and
everyone else!) both during and afterwards.

If you haven't got your ticket yet, then visit our
(ClojureScript-powered!) [XT16
ticketbooth](https://juxt.pro/XT16.html#xt16-ticketbooth). Sadly it
doesn't yet use Karsten's _geom_ library, but who knows, coming to the
conference might be the first step in your own ClojureScript 3D
adventures!
