---
author: 'jon'
title: 'Reflecting on XT16'
description: 'Looking back at our one day conference'
category: 'clojure-in'
layout: '../../layouts/BlogPost.astro'
publishedDate: '2016-10-14'
heroImage: 'reflecting-xt16.jpg'
---

import { Image } from '@astrojs/image/components'

So XT16 has been and gone. In the run-up we had mused that if nothing
else, XT16 would be a unique experience for our guests. For a start we
had marketed it to Clojure practitioners, except that there was very
little Clojure in it. It was like a _non-Clojure Clojure conference_.

Factor in also that the venue was set in the countryside away from
London, the building itself being inside of a secured automotive testing
facility. Our guests had to have their mobile phone cameras stickered
over just in case they were to photograph an elite new sports-car doing
the testing rounds.

It was all a bit crazy but we were extremely pleased that it seemed to
work out. Our theme was _technology at play_ and to keep things playful
we had Ukuleles spread about with intro beginner sheets for people to
experiment with.

import uk from '../../assets/blog/xt16-uke1.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={uk} />

Then we had a performance during the lunch break:

import uk2 from '../../assets/blog/xt16-uke2.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={uk2} />

This was after a pre-conference shared mindfulness meditation session
that helped prepare our minds. At lunch time our guests indulged in a
spot of axe-throwing and archery.

import ax from '../../assets/blog/xt16-axe1.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={ax} />

import ar from '../../assets/blog/xt16-archery.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={ar} />

Close to the venue was a brewery called [\"XT
Brewing\"](http://www.xtbrewing.com/) and so it made perfect sense for
us to label our very own XT16 beer:

import be from '../../assets/blog/xt16-beer.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={be} />

And we asked our local Milton Keynes coffee company [Bogota Coffee
Company](http://www.bogotacoffee.co.uk/) to provide the excellent
coffees and snacks.

import co from '../../assets/blog/xt16-coffee2.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={co} />

And we had a hog roast for lunch.

import ho from '../../assets/blog/xt16-hog.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={ho} />

What really made the day of course, were the talks. We had selected the
talks that would hopefully challenge the audience whilst entertaining
them, and we were not to be disappointed.

The first speaker was [James Lewis](https://twitter.com/boicy) from
ThoughtWorks giving a keynote talk on the _bazaar to the bizarre_. He
gave us an entertaining and informative whirlwind talk on the state of
the open source, trends, and where we're headed.

import ja from '../../assets/blog/xt16-jamesl.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={ja} />

Then [Karsten Schmidt](http://postspectacular.com/) found beauty
creating amazing 3D designs with a few lines of just Forth; _\'Lisp is a
great high-level language, Forth is a great low-level one_. He showed us
his work as an artist using computational design that is frankly
astonishing.

import kn from '../../assets/blog/xt16-karsten.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={kn} />

Then [Håkan Råberg](https://github.com/hraberg) took us on a personal
search for simplicity. He told us of his journey to write a Scheme in
x86-64 assembly, revealing what he had discovered from a technical and
philosophical viewpoint.

import ka from '../../assets/blog/xt16-karsten.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={ka} />

[Portia Tung](http://www.selfishprogramming.com/about/) - who was
instrumental in our theme of _Technology at Play_ - gave us an inspiring
and vital talk on why play is so crucial in the work place.

import po from '../../assets/blog/xt16-portia.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={po} />

[Kris Jenkins](http://blog.jenkster.com/) got up and strummed a Ukuele
in a poetic rage against Angular.js, and then live-coded a _virtual
audience_ web application using Elm to take Q and A.

import kr from '../../assets/blog/xt16-kris.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={kr} />

[Tommy Hall](http://www.thattommyhall.com/) gave us a highly
entertaining mathematical and algorithmic talk about building Unlimited
Register Machines.

import tm from '../../assets/blog/xt16-tommy.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={tm} />

[Frankie Sardo](https://github.com/frankiesardo) gave us a pragmatically
insightful talk on _ClojureScript without Borders_, giving a live coding
demonstration of simultaneously deploying code to native mobile devices
and the browser. The code used for his talk is
[here](https://github.com/frankiesardo/reload-demo).

import fr from '../../assets/blog/xt16-frankie.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={fr} />

[Martin Trojer](https://martintrojer.github.io/) gave a talk on _beyond
Clojure_, with a running hint that _all roads lead to Haskell_. He
talked us through the various differences in the type systems of modern
languages and gave opinions on his own preferences.

import mt from '../../assets/blog/xt16-martin.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={mt} />

[Sam Aaron](http://sam.aaron.name/) talked about Communicative
Programming and how code should be accessible to a 10 year old. His
style was what you'd expect from Sam - thought provoking and
entertaining.

import sam from '../../assets/blog/xt16-sam.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={sam} />

Futurologist [James Woudhuysen](http://www.woudhuysen.com/) gave us a
tour de force about the future, and how what we do at work matters. He
didn't hold back and claimed that innovation is stalling, that we're not
going as fast as we need to be going. It was a fantastic closing keynote
that challenged every person in the audience, elevating our minds back
up to focus on the bigger picture: humanity.

import sw from '../../assets/blog/xt16-jamesw.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={sw} />

After this we had a large pizza order arrive and people got chatting and
drinking, with Sam Aaron and others on stage programmatically creating
the beats using [Sonic Pi](http://sonic-pi.net/). Then we had a party
bus take us to the after-after party at a Milton Keynes cocktail bar.

import bs from '../../assets/blog/xt16-bus.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={bs} />

It was a fun day. There are [more photos
here](https://goo.gl/photos/nzwPsyLLssARyEyQ6) and stay tuned for videos
of the talks soon to be released.

None of this could have been possible without our brilliant sponsors
supporting the day: our Gold Sponsors [Funding
Circle](https://www.fundingcircle.com/uk/careers/),
[uSwitch](https://www.uswitch.com/vacancies/) and
[Cognitect](http://cognitect.com/), and our Silver Sponsors
[Sagax](http://www.sagaxtech.com/) and
[Metosin](http://www.metosin.fi/). Check out these companies.

import so from '../../assets/blog/xt16-sponsors.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={so} />

See you at XT18? There will be no XT17. Thank you to those who made the
trek out into the countryside!

import c2 from '../../assets/blog/xt16-crowd2.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={c2} />

import ts from '../../assets/blog/xt16-tshirt.jpg'

<Image alt='image' src={ts} />
